[Amit Varma]: We like to think that India is a free country and that we are free thinkers, but the truth
[Amit Varma]: is that we are still colonized. We think about the world and about our society through frames
[Amit Varma]: that have been constructed by others. As an illustration of this, ask yourself what comes
[Amit Varma]: to mind when you think of the word, the wife. Is the image that comes to mind that of a
[Amit Varma]: fallen sex worker, someone worthy only of contempt or pity? Or do you get the image
[Amit Varma]: of a bewitching courtesan out of Bollywood, dressed in an intricately embroidered anarkali,
[Amit Varma]: glowing with the jewelry she is wearing under the light of a crystal chandelier, Rekha or
[Amit Varma]: Meena Kumari at their most beautiful? Both these images are false. But these common impressions
[Amit Varma]: of the wives reveal a lot about our own prejudices. If only we cared to examine them closely and
[Unknown]: examine where they came from. Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on
[Unknown]: economics, politics and behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. My guest today is Sabha Dewan, filmmaker and author
[Amit Varma]: who has made a series of riveting documentaries, including the 2009 film, The Other Song that
[Amit Varma]: journeys through Varanasi, Lucknow and Muzaffarpur, looking at the lives and histories of the
[Amit Varma]: wives. She had immersed herself so deeply in the subject that when she was done with
[Amit Varma]: the film, she wrote a book called Tawaif Nama, which is filled with some incredible stories
[Amit Varma]: as also social insights that come out of history and sit uneasily in our present times. I'm
[Amit Varma]: delighted that Sabha has agreed to join me on the show today. But before we begin our
[Amit Varma]: conversation, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to The Scene and the Unseen, you can play a part in keeping the
[Amit Varma]: show alive. The Scene and the Unseen has been a labor of love for me. I've enjoyed putting
[Amit Varma]: together many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe and hopefully yours
[Amit Varma]: as well. But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off
[Amit Varma]: the show. Although The Scene and the Unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really
[Amit Varma]: woken up to the insane engagement level of podcasts. I do many, many hours of deep research
[Amit Varma]: for each episode, besides all the logistics of producing the show myself, scheduling guests,
[Amit Varma]: booking studios, paying technicians, the travel and so on. So well, I'm trying a new way of
[Amit Varma]: keeping this thing going. And that involves you. My proposition for you is this. For every
[Amit Varma]: episode of The Scene and the Unseen that you enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or even a lavish
[Amit Varma]: lunch, whatever you feel it's worth. You can do this by heading over to sceneunseen.in
[Amit Varma]: slash support and contributing an amount of your choice. This is not a subscription. The
[Amit Varma]: Scene and the Unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps and at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: This is just a gesture of appreciation. Help keep the scene going. sceneunseen.in slash
[Amit Varma]: support.
[Amit Varma]: Saba, welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. Thank you. Thank you for having me on the
[Amit Varma]: show. Before we sort of start talking about Tawaif Nama and you know, everything that's
[Amit Varma]: in the book, tell me a little bit about you know, your own personal journey. How did you
[Amit Varma]: become a filmmaker? How did all this happen? How did I become a filmmaker? Oh, Lord, that
[Guest]: was years back. Well, actually, it started off initially, as a kind of a rebellion. Both
[Guest]: my parents were journalists, and it was expected that I'd become a journalist. And so of course,
[Guest]: I didn't want to become a journalist. So the next best thing I could think of was to be
[Guest]: a filmmaker. But jokes apart, actually, I was interested in films. And I then joined
[Guest]: the Mass Communication Research Center, Jamia. Although at that time, I wasn't very clear,
[Guest]: even at that age, about the difference between documentaries or fiction. So I joined innocently
[Guest]: enough thinking cinema karenge, filme banayenge. And then hey, presto, found myself in this
[Guest]: place where, you know, the entire focus was on the documentary genre. And that opened
[Guest]: a completely wide new world for me. I mean, it was and the beauty of the documentary,
[Guest]: you know, the beauty of reality, and how slippery a creature reality is, and how difficult it
[Guest]: is to define reality, your reality might not be my reality. So I mean, it throws up all
[Guest]: these questions. And that's, that's pretty much how I entered the field.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, as a kid in the 1980s, I remember that to me when I thought of films and popular
[Amit Varma]: culture, documentaries were like the most boring thing out there. They were that films
[Amit Varma]: revision stuff that you saw once a week on Doordarshan or whatever, and it was boring
[Amit Varma]: as hell. And obviously, documentaries are a lot more than that. So you know, when did
[Amit Varma]: you first get that spark of discovery that wait a minute, this is not some boring thing
[Amit Varma]: about something, you know, where somebody is droning on and on and stuff you're not
[Amit Varma]: interested about, you can create magic out of this.
[Guest]: At Mass Communication Research Center, I pretty much thought the same. You know, I was quite
[Guest]: horrified when I realized that I was at a place where they specialized in documentaries.
[Guest]: So, you know, I had these visions of like being condemned to making these awful films
[Guest]: division documentaries. But we think I think we had some wonderful teachers at that point,
[Guest]: and also exposure to world cinema. And we saw documentaries, you know, which was certainly
[Guest]: not like the films division propaganda that we had grown up associating documentaries
[Guest]: with. And also, the early 80s was a very exciting time for the Indian documentary because the
[Guest]: Indian documentary, independent documentary was coming into its own, you know, away from
[Guest]: state funding. And that was the time when we were students and we were discovering documentary.
[Guest]: So, we were exposed to the work of people like Meera Nair, and Deepal Sanraj, and Navrose,
[Guest]: Anand Patwardhan. And we were very lucky, we're quite blessed to have them actually
[Guest]: come and show their films to us and talk to us. And so yeah, and, you know, even in terms
[Guest]: of world cinema and documentaries, international documentaries, I think there was a certain
[Guest]: kind of an exposure that we got at Jamia, which then, you know, opened us to the possibilities
[Guest]: of documentaries being an extremely creative medium. So, you know, and extremely exciting.
[Guest]: I mean, documentary, or if that's the matter with any art, is what you make it to be.
[Amit Varma]: And that was also an exciting time for cinema in the sense Shyam Banegar, Govind Yalini,
[Amit Varma]: the whole, all of that was also happening. Yes. So, did you also look at that and, you
[Amit Varma]: know, think that, okay, maybe I want to make the shift someday and make feature films or
[Amit Varma]: were you already so excited by what documentaries could do that you were just happy where you
[Guest]: were?
[Guest]: I was, we were also exposed to, you know, world cinema in terms of fiction. So, it was
[Guest]: an exciting time, both for fiction and nonfiction. And yes, I mean, I think in the initial years,
[Guest]: there was always this feeling that someday I'll make a fiction, you know, feature film.
[Guest]: But you know, in the thing is that somehow, while working on the documentary, and over
[Guest]: the period of time, documentary stopped becoming a poor cousin to the feature film, at least
[Guest]: for me, as a filmmaker, because it offers just so many exciting possibilities. And it,
[Guest]: it's also very challenging as a medium, because I mean, there is, of course, that much that
[Guest]: you have planned. But with a documentary, there's just so much that you possibly cannot
[Guest]: plan, and which comes in and if you're receptive to it, it can bring magic to what you're doing.
[Guest]: So I think that initial stage, yes, it was always like, or documentary is like a stepping
[Guest]: stone to feature films, but that was in the initial stage, then you pretty much realise
[Guest]: that documentary actually is a huge challenge in itself. And in many ways, I think more
[Guest]: challenging, because there's just so much that's not in your control.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I guess with a feature film, you've constructed a narrative and that's it, you
[Amit Varma]: follow the script, but with the documentary, you're sort of...
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, I'm sure with feature films, it's extremely challenging. And it's not only
[Guest]: a certain senior linear progression. That's not, you know, what I meant. But I mean, that
[Guest]: in a documentary, you could say, I'm going to do this, you could land up in a place,
[Guest]: and the character that you had kind of spent time with, etc, etc. And, you know, thought
[Guest]: she was all ready to shoot with you. And suddenly something's happened. You know, there's some
[Guest]: death in the family or something, some emergency, and she's gone. And so pretty much you are
[Guest]: there, but your character is gone. And so what are you going to do? Either you cancel
[Guest]: your shoot, or you think of something else to do. I think those are the ways I think
[Guest]: as a documentary filmmaker, you've got to be really, really very resourceful. And, you
[Guest]: know, trying to work out things at the spot.
[Amit Varma]: And did you fall into that trap early on that, you know, you go there with a fixed sort of
[Amit Varma]: notion in mind, a fixed narrative in mind, but then you have to adapt? Or were you aware
[Amit Varma]: from the start that you just have to leave yourself open?
[Guest]: No, I think mercifully, you know, I, I think it was also the kind of training we had at
[Guest]: Jamia. I mean, we were lucky because, you know, we had Professor James Beveridge is
[Guest]: one of the stalwarts of the documentary, Canadian documentary. And it's he who he and his wife,
[Guest]: Margaret, who was an ace editor, who helped set up the film school at Jamia. We were lucky
[Guest]: to have him as our teacher. So the emphasis was actually on cinema verity of, of, you
[Guest]: know, shooting as unfolding as things happen. So you don't construct. And you don't feed
[Guest]: people lines. But that's the simpler aspect of it. I think what is more problematic, and
[Guest]: I think a lot of filmmakers tend to fall into that trap. And I think a lot of times that
[Guest]: comes a out of ignorance of not knowing better, and be out of a certain arrogance, which is
[Guest]: that you presume someone's reality, that you understand someone's reality. And you presume
[Guest]: where they're coming from. And you presume that they're going to say this, or they ought
[Guest]: to say this, and this ought to be their understanding. And a lot of people fall into that trap, even
[Guest]: in terms of very political filmmaking, you know, there's the subaltern, the subaltern
[Guest]: has to be in the vanguard of the revolution, the subaltern may not be on the vanguard of
[Guest]: the revolution, you know. And so, so, I think I did start off with certain notions, because
[Guest]: how can not someone not be like that, you know, you those presumptions, but I think
[Guest]: as you grow older, and hopefully a bit wiser, and also, you get enough knocks in life, to
[Guest]: get some humility dinked into you, to realize that you don't have the answer. And it's good.
[Guest]: It's good, you don't have all the answers. Because that's the only way that you can relate
[Guest]: to people as human beings to human beings, not as like filmmaker here, and subject there.
[Guest]: And it's only then when you can have the two people, you are talking to people as people,
[Guest]: without any preconceived expectations. That makes for a real conversation, actually a
[Guest]: meaningful conversation. I think that took me time. And that was the biggest learning
[Amit Varma]: process.
[Amit Varma]: And what kind of subjects were you drawn to?
[Guest]: You know, a lot of my work has been with women, for the very simple reason that I am a woman.
[Guest]: And I think I understand women better. Women interest me, women's lives interest me. That's
[Guest]: I think the most important thing. And having been part of the feminist movement and, you
[Guest]: know, believing in a certain kind of a politics. Yes, I'm drawn to the kind of challenges that
[Guest]: women face. So yeah, my protagonists have mostly been women. But the subject, the subjects
[Guest]: could be any, you know, a lot of my work has been political, and working in the realm of
[Guest]: culture. So it's a pretty diverse portfolio in that sense. You know, that is a work with,
[Guest]: you know, survivors of abusive marriages. But then I've also worked with girls and young
[Guest]: women going to the mountains for the first time, and just a trek film, which is a fun
[Guest]: film. And then of course, I've worked with this trilogy that I did, which is the other
[Guest]: song is part of that trilogy, which is on, you know, stigmatized female performers. So
[Guest]: I'm kind of moved. And I've also worked, done a film on the women of my own family. It's
[Guest]: called Sita's family, looking at middle class women and looking at the kind of issues that
[Guest]: they face. I mean, women who, you know, made the choice of, you know, working outside the
[Guest]: house, but then what are the kind of expectations that society has of them, but more importantly,
[Guest]: which they impose on themselves, the kind of, you know, expectations that they've internalized
[Amit Varma]: about being good women. So, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, like, one of the things that has struck me over the last few years reading
[Amit Varma]: history and doing a lot of episodes with historians, is that we take the male gaze on history for
[Amit Varma]: granted. Most of history, of course, is told from a male gaze. And therefore, there is
[Amit Varma]: a lot that is invisible or unseen, as it were, to that gaze. And it struck me while reading
[Amit Varma]: your book that so much of the book also sort of deals with that about making that unseen
[Amit Varma]: sort of visible. And what I also found sort of fascinating was, you know, one is, of course,
[Amit Varma]: the cliched ways of looking at the virus, which I sort of referred to in the introduction,
[Amit Varma]: which is, you know, what I grew up with, at least. So, you know, so this is sort of pretty
[Amit Varma]: much what you thought, and then you peel back the layers. And, you know, another thing that
[Amit Varma]: I have sort of discovered in recent episodes with historians is how so much of what we
[Amit Varma]: think of our own society and culture is constructed by the British when they came here, because
[Amit Varma]: they were obviously looking for simplistic narratives to explain the world to themselves,
[Amit Varma]: so they could neatly categorize everything. You in your book, of course, referred to Francis
[Amit Varma]: Buchanan, but this was pretty much the attitude of the British from the late 18th century
[Amit Varma]: onwards that they're trying to figure it out. They have access to only the elites who are,
[Amit Varma]: of course, upper caste Brahmins, so they get that sort of a version of history and then
[Amit Varma]: that gets ossified. And the rich, thriving sort of culture of the wives, you know, then
[Amit Varma]: they shine this moralistic light on it and everything just changes. Tell me a little
[Guest]: bit about this process.
[Guest]: See, we need to understand a few things. The thing is not that, you know, I think what
[Guest]: the book doesn't deal with it in that greater detail, although I do mention it, and which
[Guest]: is that the wives, it's not as if before the India was colonized or before the British
[Guest]: came, the wives occupied a highly respectable position in society, which is the book. The
[Guest]: book keeps actually, you know, reiterating that they enjoyed high prestige, which is
[Guest]: not the same as being respectable, you know, because they were attached to the nobility
[Guest]: and individual men of the elite and the court. So they had access to power, they had access
[Guest]: to wealth. And they were, of course, very sought after performers, musicians and dancers,
[Guest]: in many cases also poets and writers and patrons of actually artists. They occupied a very
[Guest]: ambiguous space between, you know, repute and disrepute, which is because of the certain
[Guest]: stigma of being out of purdah. And, you know, out in the gaze of available, actually to
[Guest]: all technically, although they were not. But yes, I mean, you know, it's out in the gaze
[Guest]: of men. And yet they had a certain designated space within society. They were not certainly
[Guest]: not looked down upon. In fact, people, you know, there was this much sought after too.
[Guest]: And what was also very interesting, and if while I was researching was, it's not just
[Guest]: the men that they've had relationships with, they actually would be invited at points of
[Guest]: time by the women in the zanana, not very often, but they did. And so to perform on
[Guest]: certain special occasions, etc., which I think is an important point, because the ways in
[Guest]: which patriarchy insulates, you know, women of disrepute from what are the pure women.
[Guest]: With tawafs that was not exactly happening. So I mean, not all tawafs, but tawafs of the
[Guest]: highest repute, for instance, did have some access to the zananas of the aristocracy,
[Guest]: because we have mention of that, even in the novel Umrao Jaanada, which actually is, you
[Guest]: know, is hailed for its very, very authentic portrayal of 19th century Lucknow, makes mention
[Guest]: of that. I think what happens with the coming on of the British is as you know, as you have
[Guest]: mentioned very rightly, it's not just the tawafs. I mean, there was pretty much it happened
[Guest]: with everything where here is, you know, an alien government, a colonial government, trying
[Guest]: to understand in the simplest possible terms, a subject people and a subject people, which,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, the most bewildering variety possible and heterogeneity amongst them. So
[Guest]: it's not Europe, they chose to colonize India, which is an entire subcontinent in itself.
[Guest]: And you know, they had confronted with this kind of a heterogeneity. So one of the ways
[Guest]: in which one and you know, colonizers deal with heterogeneity is to actually somewhere
[Guest]: smoothen out the differences and to, you know, make uniform or at least impose a certain
[Guest]: uniformity of understanding. So yeah, you they had, you know, you have these volley
[Guest]: of ethnographers, self-styled ethnographers, they're not ethnographers, ethnographers,
[Guest]: but travellers who could be missionaries, who could be administrators, who could be
[Guest]: colonial traders, you know, I mean, it's a variety of people who are travelling in India
[Guest]: and making copious notes about all manner of, you know, subjects pertaining to the so-called
[Guest]: native life. But it is not only actually an exercise in naivety, or even in terms of,
[Guest]: you know, trying to understand an alien people. It is also informed by the imperatives of
[Guest]: colonization itself. So it's not entirely an innocent exercise. And there is a certain
[Guest]: imperative, there's an imperative of, you know, divide and rule. And much as it sounds
[Guest]: a cliche now, the fact is that there is ways in which there is a constant refrain about
[Guest]: Hindus and Muslims. Whereas the interesting thing is that actually in the early ethnographic
[Guest]: records, there are communities upon communities of people who return themselves as both Hindus
[Guest]: and Muslims, much to the chagrin of, you know, the colonial ethnographers, because how can
[Guest]: you be both Hindu and Muslim?
[Amit Varma]: In fact, even the term Hindu encompasses so much less than what it does today, it's practically
[Guest]: reconstructed.
[Guest]: It's a 19th century term, actually. And people not returning themselves as Hindus, people
[Guest]: are returning themselves as Bhumiyar or this or that, you know, it's caste based. So this
[Guest]: ways in which there is a certain homogenizing of putting them under a certain labeling people,
[Guest]: that process takes place with the coming of the British process gets consolidated, solidified
[Guest]: with that entire process of census, you know, which from, I think, 1891 or something when
[Guest]: first census records start getting collected.
[Guest]: But there's also a process in which especially after 1857, where there are ways in which
[Guest]: there is a certain stereotypes being created, and quite consciously being created and projected.
[Guest]: Among those stereotypes, you know, are the stereotypes of the decadent, depraved, you
[Guest]: know, less vicious, Indian male, especially Indian princes, and who are more usually Muslim
[Guest]: Nawabs, but could be actually also Hindus. Because this is the ruling class, the native
[Guest]: ruling class that stood up against colonial might in 1857. So there's ways in which they
[Guest]: are being maligned, and the kind of lifestyle associated with them then is portrayed as
[Guest]: decadent.
[Guest]: Now, here, of course, I think what also happens is that evangelism and Victorian morality
[Guest]: also come into play, because a figure of a Tawaf makes no sense. She can only be a prostitute.
[Guest]: In fact, that treatment is given not just to Tawafs, but even the Afdasis. So any female
[Guest]: sexuality that exists outside of marriage has to be prostitute. So in fact, that is
[Guest]: an entire spectrum that gets labelled as prostitute, not just the Tawafs.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, what also sort of strikes me as interesting is that there are almost like
[Amit Varma]: two forms of patriarchy playing out here. One, of course, is that the very existence
[Amit Varma]: of Tawafs, as almost a separate class and a separate community of people, points to
[Amit Varma]: the fact that the rest of the women, the women who are married, who are part of households,
[Amit Varma]: are supposed to keep their sexuality repressed. So that's a separate class. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: because you want singing, dancing women who are expressing themselves freely, it's almost
[Amit Varma]: as if there is a necessity for a community of Tawafs, who then kind of looked at differently,
[Amit Varma]: but without necessarily the moral stigma, which then the British bring to it and the
[Amit Varma]: British come with this moral stigma at this sort of sexual expression, blah, blah, blah,
[Amit Varma]: they give a moral colour to it. And you know, even the sort of like, every time I hear of
[Amit Varma]: Tawafs being painted as sex workers and prostitutes, and the first thing I think that it strikes
[Amit Varma]: me we have to fight is what is wrong with sex workers and prostitutes to begin with?
[Amit Varma]: Why should you know that be a slur, but given that it is and is one of the things that we've
[Amit Varma]: normalised and is there, regardless, it's a huge step down. The other question I wanted
[Amit Varma]: to ask was, how empowered are the Tawafs in the sense that in contrast to the other women
[Amit Varma]: in society, they appear to have more autonomy, like sure, they function within that patriarchal
[Amit Varma]: setup, and they have to cater to the wishes of men. And that's what they are trained for.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, within that setup, they can shape their destiny far more, they are
[Amit Varma]: the heads of their communities. As you pointed out, for example, they even get a major share
[Amit Varma]: of the revenue share, like, you know, if there are 16 Annas, nine goes to the Tawaf and whatever,
[Amit Varma]: and they have a very sort of respected place within that community. So, you know, looking
[Amit Varma]: back as a feminist, and obviously, these are not people who are feminists per se, they
[Amit Varma]: are making the best of what they can within that system. What's your sense of these different
[Amit Varma]: degrees of autonomy and how these women are trying to negotiate these spaces?
[Guest]: You know, I wouldn't, I refrained and even in the book, I refrained from using terms
[Guest]: like empowered, because A, Tawafs don't exist as a community. We are talking about them
[Guest]: in the past tense, necessarily, because that community has been wiped out. And two, I think
[Guest]: there are, you know, terms like being empowered, for instance, or liberated. We, these, you
[Guest]: know, the present context coming out of a certain politics in the present, I am very
[Guest]: hesitant to use those parameters for in the past. Because, you know, I mean, you have
[Guest]: to see and understand reality within in the past context, in the historical context, within
[Guest]: those parameters of the given parameters of those times. Yes, definitely, relatively speaking,
[Guest]: and I will keep using the term relative, because it was relative. The fact is that the wives
[Guest]: were not independent of patriarchy. They were very much an adjunct of patriarchy. The community
[Guest]: existed because of patriarchy, you know, patriarchy and in the sense of male entitlement, which
[Guest]: wanted actually their wives, but also wanted to have these, you know, fascinating, beautiful,
[Guest]: talented, witty, you know, mistresses. So I mean, so the fact is that definitely, male
[Guest]: entitlement was at the base of, you know, the existence of the wives or devdasis that
[Amit Varma]: goes without saying. So it's like the men are making these boxes to put women in and
[Guest]: this particular box has more space within it. But it never, you see, I think what happens
[Guest]: though is that socially when and with human beings, it never quite works out as you expect
[Guest]: it to. So for instance, even in terms of, you know, when you're saying that in terms
[Guest]: of women of the household being sexually repressed, that's our presumption living in the 21st
[Guest]: century. You know, there's enough writing and glimpses that one gets of the Zanana,
[Guest]: which seems to have been a pretty thriving sexual space, which, you know, which is something
[Guest]: that, but then one would have to understand it within the context of that space. If we
[Guest]: try to start posing our understanding of what is active, being sexually active or sexually
[Guest]: liberated, it doesn't work out that way. Similarly, with the Thawars. Yes, obviously, I mean,
[Guest]: they were there as adjunct and they were very much adjunct of patriarchy. Their entire existence
[Guest]: was dependent upon the patronage that they received from men. Without that, they're nothing.
[Guest]: But given all that, within that, the fact is that here's a community of women where
[Guest]: it is the women within the community who call the shots. You know, they are the ones, for
[Guest]: instance, who are the head of the households. They are the ones who are the karta of the
[Guest]: house, you know, in terms of the Hindu undivided family. The Thawar head of the family, actually
[Guest]: her position corresponded more or less to the eldest son of the Hindu undivided family.
[Guest]: They are the ones who, you know, depending, I mean, the laws of inheritance were different
[Guest]: for different castes and communities of Thawars. But in many communities, Thawar daughters
[Guest]: got a larger share, for instance, of the inheritance from their mothers and aunts, etc. than their
[Guest]: brothers. In many other communities, at least the community I worked with, they got an equal
[Guest]: share. Sisters and brothers had an equal share. It varied from community to community. But
[Guest]: then they were much wealthier, ultimately, because they also held their own property.
[Guest]: They made their own property. These were self-made women. So they were also jodhrayans of the
[Guest]: community at large. The community itself was not just made up of women. It was also made
[Guest]: up of the accompanist musicians, the tabla players, the sarangi players, the majira players,
[Guest]: all of whom were men, who were teachers to Thawars, who were also their accompanists,
[Guest]: and who were also dependent on Thawars for their livelihood. And in every town, you know,
[Guest]: you had these kota communities, and it was the Thawars, and they had their own system
[Guest]: of, you know, panchayat or council, which to regulate the affairs, internal affairs
[Guest]: of the community. And it was the Thawars who headed these panchayats, always. So, you know,
[Guest]: in terms of the household, it is they had definitely, it is they who called the shots
[Guest]: of how the house would be run, you know, the family would be run. And they had relatively
[Guest]: greater autonomy, in terms of also choosing who to take on as a lover and who not to,
[Guest]: which now that depended, you know, if you came from, you're a poor Thawar, and you came
[Guest]: from, you know, a poorer family, you might not have the luxury to exercise that choice,
[Guest]: because you would have to then take on anyone who offered. But the say the women who were
[Guest]: on the higher echelons of the community, they definitely exercise that choice. That's very
[Guest]: well known. So, you know, they rejected lovers, they took on lovers. So, yes, I mean, there
[Guest]: was a certain sense, a certain autonomous lifestyle, I'd say, that one sees there. And
[Guest]: which also, I think, gets reflected in the pursuit of their art practice. That's an argument
[Guest]: that I've made, that actually the Thumri and Dadra, etc, that we hear, which is from the
[Guest]: Thawar's voice, that reflects a certain kind of autonomous living lifestyle, a certain
[Amit Varma]: openness of being. And a really telling illustration of the centrality of women in the Thawar community
[Amit Varma]: was an anecdote at the start of your book, where you talk about how your protagonist
[Amit Varma]: shows you this family portrait of generations of her family, her aunts and grandmothers
[Amit Varma]: and grandaunts and all that. And the family portrait is entirely women. And you point
[Amit Varma]: out in contrast, on how a traditional family portrait and any other family portrait is
[Guest]: mostly men. My father's family portraits, they're just such few women, and they're not
[Guest]: part of the main portraits at all. So, you know, the so called official family portrait
[Guest]: has all these men, but the women are not there. Except much later now, that's only but that
[Guest]: happens only by the 60s or so, where then women start making an entry into family portraits,
[Guest]: but not earlier than that. But yes, I mean, in Thawar households, you know, you have these
[Guest]: walls and you have these photographs. And just women, you know, just my aunt, my great
[Guest]: aunt, my mother, my grandmother, and there are no men present. So it is a very telling.
[Guest]: Men are there, they are part of the household. But the kind of status that they have is pretty
[Guest]: much what women enjoy in patriarchal households. And, you know, one of the things that sort
[Amit Varma]: of your book talks a lot about is the extensive training in the arts that the wives go through,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the traditions of the Bol Banao Thumri, Hori, Chaiti, Kajri, Dadra, the association
[Amit Varma]: of the Kathak with the wives and all that. And at one point you say, quote, besides long
[Amit Varma]: and arduous training in music and dance, in order to be successful, the wives had to be
[Amit Varma]: educated in a range of other skills, such as a grounding in literature and politics,
[Amit Varma]: as well as knowledge of the intricacies of social etiquette, and of erotic stimulation.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote. And I have a couple of questions here. One is, how are the arts being looked
[Amit Varma]: at by all these people? Like today, the arts are something relatively respectable, that
[Amit Varma]: if you, you know, know a woman who's a writer or a singer or whatever is very respectable,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Lata Mangeshkar is absolutely revered. How were the arts looked at back then? And
[Amit Varma]: was there a reason that it was, you know, more the province of the wives, so to say,
[Amit Varma]: and looked at by whom? Looked at in a general social sense. Okay, by society, by society,
[Amit Varma]: like, you know, you have women in the in the wife communities, they are being trained in
[Amit Varma]: all of those arts, but there is not so much of that happening outside of it. It almost
[Amit Varma]: seems happening outside. Yeah, it is almost as if it is restricted to them. And the second
[Amit Varma]: sense that, you know, I got from the paragraph I read out, for example, is that all of this,
[Amit Varma]: you know, training in the arts, training in literature, training in practices of seduction
[Amit Varma]: is all a means to an end, you have to get a patron, there's an economic imperative at
[Guest]: the bottom of it. I think there's this definite shift in the ways in which the arts get constructed
[Guest]: and looked upon from the, say, the early 20th century, with the coming on of cultural nationalism.
[Guest]: And then there's this entire focus upon our ancient culture, which kind of starts, you
[Guest]: know, it's part of a certain kind of nationalism, and defining a certain kind of an Indianness.
[Guest]: So that makes cultural expression more respectable. So where, where, yes, music and dance of a
[Guest]: certain kind, but then again, that there's a problem there, because music and dance of
[Guest]: a certain kind is acceptable and not of another kind. I'll come to that later. But I think
[Guest]: that if you read, you know, any of the writings before that, and even if you talk to the older
[Guest]: people in the community, even now, I mean, not that they came from that century, they
[Guest]: didn't pretty much. But I mean, they carry certain oral memories and traditions far more.
[Guest]: I sense a very, matter of fact, robust dealing with the arts. You know, it's not like these
[Guest]: rarefied deities, sangeet toh puja ke liye hai, you know, that whatever, sangeet sadhana
[Guest]: or, you don't hear that, at least from within the community. Music is terribly important,
[Guest]: and not just as a means of livelihood. I mean, sure, it was their livelihood, but it's also
[Guest]: the ways in which it defines them. So there is a, their own sense of being gets defined
[Guest]: as musician. So I think the ways in which they look at music is so, so subliminal that
[Guest]: it's also defies easy categorization or definition. I mean, even if they, I mean, I've tried to
[Guest]: talk to a lot of women about it, and then they'll tell you things like, they'll give
[Guest]: you anecdotes to explain to you what music means to them. And each one of them is important,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, in terms of this woman who told me that how, you know, she got this patron
[Guest]: and who, who loved her so much and so deeply, and he wanted to make a respectable woman
[Guest]: out of her. And so he took her away and he said, now you don't have to dance and sing
[Guest]: for a living. And he looked after her and he was true to his promise. He did look after
[Guest]: her and all of that. And she had children from him. Things went, were going fine, but
[Guest]: she started falling ill and she went into a deep depression. She was just terribly ill.
[Guest]: And and then finally no medicine worked. And then, you know, and this is like a tale that
[Guest]: gets told by a lot of sources. It's one of those apocryphal tales, which a lot of tawafs
[Guest]: will tell you. It's also attributed to Begum Akhtar. The same thing happened to Begum Akhtar.
[Guest]: But then a lot of other lesser tawafs will also tell you that and take that story for
[Guest]: themselves. I think the importance is not whether this happened or doesn't happen. I
[Guest]: think it's what's, what is it telling you? It's telling you that for all, you know, the
[Guest]: music is like, this is saans ki tarah hai. It's your breath. And so, so all the respectability
[Guest]: and status that they could get in exchange. This story explains that how actually without
[Guest]: music you die, you know, and you die a spiritual death, if not a physical death. Although in
[Guest]: these stories, it's like I was dying physically too, because it's just shriveling up in within
[Guest]: myself. So I think that to me is a very powerful indicator of what music means. But it's not
[Guest]: necessarily imbued with the kind of spiritual connotations that music gets imbued by, say,
[Guest]: by early 20th century, under the influence of the cultural nationalist. I mean, the community
[Guest]: of musicians saw it that way. I think pretty much even in terms of writing, in terms of
[Guest]: society and patrons, music is of course, you know, valorized, validated musicians are made
[Guest]: much of. Patronage of musicians indicates a certain kind of your good taste and status
[Guest]: and adds, you know, kind of a certain respectability to your position, etc. It's prestige. But
[Guest]: music and gavaiyas, you know, there is also a certain kind of disrepute attached to it.
[Guest]: You know, it's like, there is, if you, and I think that has to do very much with a certain
[Guest]: fear and a certain construction of, this is my understanding of masculinity. And which
[Guest]: is that, you know, indulgence in music, in ras, as they say, jo ras mein lean hona, that's
[Guest]: all very well. So whether it is music or whether it is the beauty of a woman, love, you know,
[Guest]: all of those things, to be an aesthete is something of course, which is preferable and
[Guest]: which is much looked up to. But if as a man you lose yourself into that, then it is doom
[Guest]: for you. So there is a certain kind of a cautionary note always there in terms of be a good patron,
[Guest]: be a judicious patron. If you kind of go completely enraptured by it, then you spell doom for
[Guest]: yourself, for your household, for business, for dharma. And that holds true, I think both
[Guest]: for, you know, I mean, pretty much within the, you know, Hindus and Muslims, upper classes,
[Guest]: there is that certain, and I think you in Mughal writing, again, the ideal Mirza, who's
[Guest]: the Mughal aristocrat, the ideal Mirza, he is an aesthete, he will patronize artists,
[Guest]: but he will also patronize, you know, wrestlers and he will patronize this and he'll patronize
[Guest]: that. But he shouldn't get completely so enraptured that he loses sense of his duties and responsibilities.
[Guest]: This is pretty much the same thing as the Kartas of a Hindu household. You know, if
[Guest]: you have the means, certainly indulge in the finer things, but don't get so enraptured
[Guest]: that it brings doom to your household. And you have so many cautionary tales about that.
[Guest]: So I think that that is the certain role, the certain place that the arts occupied,
[Guest]: where arts are very well, and they are marker of your status of, you know, the status of
[Guest]: the patron. Because they were based so much on individual patronage, without individual
[Guest]: patronage, arts could not flourish. But arts did not define in totality, your sense of
[Guest]: identity of being whatever you were, in all. I mean, for the artist, yes. Not in the way,
[Guest]: for instance, by early 20th century, you have the arts, which start defining a certain notion
[Guest]: of Indianness, for instance. Before that, there's also a very robust kind of ways in
[Guest]: which arts are looked at, like they're not rarefied. So you have this thing about, you
[Guest]: know, when now in early 20th century writing, there's this whole big difference being made
[Guest]: between classical music, and so called lowly popular music. You see, writing before that,
[Guest]: that kind of difference is not made. Also, in terms of the singers themselves, I mean,
[Guest]: not that we have too much of oral record of it, because recordings come in only by early
[Guest]: 20th century. But in the early recordings, you have singers who are pretty much singing
[Guest]: a whole medley of stuff. And not just very consciously raga based, you know, music. So,
[Guest]: I don't know if I've answered your question. But I think there are shifts that take place
[Guest]: by early 20th century, under the imperative of nationalism, you know, and which then the
[Guest]: arts get start getting defined in a certain way, which is how we receive them now, how
[Guest]: we perceive them now. That's not necessarily something that is shared, you know, pre nationalism.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a fascinating point you made about, you know, that conception of masculinity,
[Amit Varma]: which I'll sit back and process gradually, where it almost seems that you're drawing
[Amit Varma]: an analogue between the arts and the wives, where men are supposed to patronize both,
[Amit Varma]: but not get carried away and give themselves over to both would that be? Yeah, I mean,
[Guest]: the arts are often symbolized, you know, as beautiful women also, they come in that shape.
[Guest]: So it's the musicians, I mean, the wives, yes. But even male musician, I mean, the fact
[Guest]: is that you have to maintain a basically the whole emphasis was on maintaining knowing
[Guest]: how to maintain a judicious balance of being an aesthete, but also being a householder
[Guest]: and a responsible householder. And that has to be balanced. Now that that kind of worldview
[Guest]: changes with the coming in of cultural nationalism. And so you have, you know, music, for instance,
[Guest]: music now starts defining the contours of Indian identity. And you know, pride of a
[Guest]: certain nationalist pride in being Indian. So and that carries with it a whole lot of
[Guest]: baggage, because then certain kind of music becomes acceptable. A lot of other kind of
[Guest]: music is not acceptable. Certain musicians are acceptable. Certain musicians, many musicians
[Guest]: really in which also includes all the wives and the devdasis who you know, who are seen
[Guest]: to embody a certain an illicit sexuality. And, you know, their art practice is based
[Guest]: on pleasure seeking. Now, that is not something which is very acceptable to the cultural nationalists
[Guest]: who are imbuing the arts with these all these spiritual connotations, you know, of some
[Guest]: higher purpose and higher being and so those things change. And so, you know, in that process,
[Guest]: exactly not just the colonialists who give the wives who gave the wives, you know, a
[Guest]: big kick, the bigger portions of stigmatization came actually from our very own nationalists.
[Amit Varma]: And as you pointed out in your book, our nationalists were actually educated by the British in the
[Amit Varma]: British system. So, you know, they did pick up some interesting British liberal values,
[Amit Varma]: but they also picked up this kind of sense of morality. One question that struck me repeatedly
[Amit Varma]: while sort of reading a book was about the wives sense of themselves, in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: if I take the very cynical view that you may disagree with, but if I take the very cynical
[Amit Varma]: view for a moment, that all human interactions are transactional, and that whatever else
[Amit Varma]: that appears non transactional is essentially a veneer, we are rationalizing it. So there's
[Amit Varma]: a kind of women who are living traditional lives, and their housewives and they're doing
[Amit Varma]: whatever, in some sense, they are self delusional. But I would imagine that the wives would be
[Amit Varma]: less delusional, because they would have a much clearer sense of the transactional nature
[Amit Varma]: of relationships of the sort of role that they play within, you know, the patriarchal
[Amit Varma]: system that they are part of. So does that make sense to you that there is a greater
[Amit Varma]: sense of self awareness there. And this also struck me like you quoted one the wife is
[Amit Varma]: telling you, tum bahut bholi ho aur bahut bevakoof bhi ho. And this also seems to be,
[Guest]: you know, an expression of a certain kind. I think that has to do with she was commenting
[Guest]: more on my class. And the kind of you know, I mean, you come from a certain class and
[Guest]: you are kind of inured from the harshness of life. And there's a certain naivety that
[Guest]: she presumed that I was coming with. But firstly, I don't think that women who were housebound
[Amit Varma]: weren't necessarily delusional at all. Necessarily, but it would have helped if they were for
[Amit Varma]: them to be happy. Yes, they sought their happiness and found their happiness in whatever ways
[Guest]: in which they I'm sure I mean, it's just that so much less is written about from within
[Guest]: the household in terms of, you know, I'm sure they also found their ways of playing patriarchy.
[Guest]: You have to if you have to survive, whether in a nice way or a bad way, but that's not
[Guest]: the point. The point is that if you have to, it's an unequal relationship. And so people
[Guest]: who are placed in that position on the wrong foot, then they find their ways to play the
[Guest]: system. So that's because if you see if you were to talk to I mean, you know, I'm not
[Guest]: talking about the wives, I'm talking about housebound women, and they interest me a great
[Guest]: deal because my own family, for instance, and especially my father's family, pretty
[Guest]: much represented that, you know, it's very patriarchal family and very tradition bound
[Guest]: to a certain extent. And yet there are all these stories of these grandmothers and grandaunts,
[Guest]: whose word was law. Now, how was their word law? You know, because technically, they did
[Guest]: not enjoy, they did not even have the right to inherit, etc. So how was their word law,
[Guest]: but their word apparently was law. And even none of the men crossed, you know, if they
[Guest]: said some decided something, then even the men could wouldn't go against that. So I think
[Guest]: that it's a complicated field. It's not that all women could, I think most women had a
[Guest]: shit time and a horrible time. But I think we can't make victims out of everyone. So
[Guest]: and the fact is that the women lived certain lives. And that's for me, that's what I'm
[Guest]: saying is that as as a documentarian, I mean, that's what has always been interesting. What
[Guest]: were those lives? What did they make of it? How did they look at it? I mean, so I don't
[Guest]: know, they were delusional at all. Pretty much my might have seen that, man, I'm situated
[Guest]: here. Now I've got to work myself into a certain way. And you know, I mean, they were after
[Guest]: all, there they were in this hive of complicated, really power laden relationships, how to move
[Guest]: and make your move, it seemed like some elaborate kind of a chess game, if you look at it from
[Guest]: the outside, and well, they were they played it. So maybe some played it better than the
[Amit Varma]: others. But no, I think I think my phrasing was clumsy. I wasn't using the term delusional
[Amit Varma]: as as a way of dissing them. Like my very cynical view is that I think we all need delusions
[Amit Varma]: to survive and we choose our own delusions. You know, some may believe in God or some
[Amit Varma]: may overemphasize notions of romantic love or whatever. And it seems to me that the wives
[Amit Varma]: by virtue of their position would at least be disabused of some of the typical delusions
[Guest]: that I think that again would be romanticizing them. Because, you know, the fact is that
[Guest]: yes, there, I think there's maybe a greater awareness than most, in terms of having an
[Guest]: awareness of the transactional nature of their relationships, which may be many of us. And
[Guest]: I think especially the middle class, we are uncomfortable admitting that. And so we kind
[Guest]: of say, we put a lot of things to it. But that's the same as sex workers do. There is
[Guest]: a certain and there's a recognition of that, because with the sex worker, for instance,
[Guest]: comes stripped of everything else, you've got to recognize it for what it is. And I
[Guest]: think with the wives too, what they were very good at, actually was to create illusion.
[Guest]: So I think that is the interesting point, because, you know, here are women who are
[Guest]: entering into, well, I will be your lover, you will be my patron, you will maintain me
[Guest]: the monthly income, blah, blah, blah, you know, it came with a certain ways of being.
[Guest]: And so it was a certain transaction, but it was never stated as such. It was all played
[Guest]: out as this elaborate love affair. And, you know, which they are in control of. Well,
[Guest]: yes, but which is what they would like to believe that they were always in control.
[Guest]: But believe me, there were a lot of stories, even in this book, there are, where sometimes
[Guest]: they were not in control. They were human beings, you know, human beings win in love,
[Guest]: lose in love. And I think that's how things go on. So yeah, I wouldn't make them into
[Guest]: some super women. And that was my endeavor also in the book. They're not that these super
[Guest]: women who are also clear eyed all the time. Relatively speaking, yes, because the nature
[Guest]: of their relationship with the outside, not within themselves, there is a certain recognition,
[Guest]: because it's also easier to recognize the transactional nature of that relationship.
[Guest]: Because that's how it takes place. And yes, there is a certain kind of wisdom and smartness
[Guest]: that is there because they are survivors and these are self made women. I think that is
[Guest]: really important. They don't have any padding of, you know, family or someone padding you
[Guest]: up forget about family, just your class privileges, or where you come from, or, you know, none
[Guest]: of that. So if you are a survivor, then you know, you cannot afford to be in some delusional
[Guest]: state, you've got to be far more clear eyed, that certainly, but to the extent that for
[Guest]: women who were, I mean, we're talking about the heydays of the Tawaif culture. Yes, there
[Guest]: were young Tawaifs who also fell in love, and who also stupidly wanted to throw away
[Guest]: their, you know, thriving careers, who fell in love during wrestling matches, as we shall
[Guest]: discuss shortly. And who, well, who, you know, it was just as well that Dilip Singh went
[Guest]: off. Otherwise, she was quite happy to have gone after, she was a young Tawaif. So those
[Guest]: things happened. I mean, after all, these men and women, love strikes also.
[Amit Varma]: No, it's interesting that the story you mentioned about the Tawaif falling ill because she has
[Amit Varma]: been separated from her music, seemed poignant to me. And that also seemed to speak to this
[Amit Varma]: point. And I hope I'm not simplifying too much, that whereas they might recognize the
[Amit Varma]: contingent nature of everything else, their relationship with music is not contingent.
[Amit Varma]: Because if you are a musician, there is nothing transactional about that. It's all encompassing.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, when separated from the one genuine thing in your life, I can sort of
[Guest]: sense where that... No, there are lots. Actually, music is, of course, a very, very, very important
[Guest]: thing. But that's not the only genuine thing in the lives of Tawaifs. You know, their relationships
[Guest]: with each other, for instance. I mean, the kind of very close relationships that women
[Guest]: share with each other. Now, that is something and the book has it, you know, except I'm
[Guest]: not that I'm not underlining it. But the fact is, their primary relationships are with women,
[Guest]: with other women. Women with their own family, their sisters or their daughters or nieces
[Guest]: or whatever aunts. Or very often their adopted children. Adopted children, friends, women
[Guest]: friends from within the community. And these are really intense relationships. So I remember
[Guest]: one of the women who's now a very good friend. Very early on, I was flicking through her
[Guest]: photographs and I came across these two photographs of the same woman and with her arm around
[Guest]: her. And there's something about it. So I said, Who is she? And she said, Yeh humaari
[Guest]: friend hai. You know, and that seemed okay. Friend, you know, this and she's also a Tawaif
[Guest]: but from Gaya, not from even the same town. Then over the years, I got to know her. To
[Guest]: this day, I don't really know the nature of their relationship, whether it's sexual or
[Guest]: not. I don't know. I don't think it matters. Yeah, because I'm not sure that for her too,
[Guest]: is the kind of woman she is. There's a certain abundance of so much to her, you know, in
[Guest]: terms of the ability to give and the ability to also take. So, I don't know. But yes, I
[Guest]: know why those photographs are there. Because the intensity of that love, that friendship,
[Guest]: humaari friend hai. It really struck to me. I can't explain it, but it meant so much the
[Guest]: way she said it. And of course, then I got to know her and I met the other woman. And
[Guest]: I know how close they are. I mean, it's like, you know that if this woman, if there's something
[Guest]: plaguing her, then the other woman will definitely know. You know, she will know what is the
[Guest]: real issue. So, those are also relationships, which are very, very important. Actually,
[Guest]: family relationships, it is the other part which is rarely talked about, which is there
[Guest]: in the book. Of course, book talks locates them in their family. We make this categorization
[Guest]: between family women and tawaifs. Family women are respectable women and tawaifs are well
[Guest]: tawaifs. And somehow, in popular culture, in cinema, tawaifs are always shown. You know,
[Guest]: these alienated creatures from nowhere almost, with no one. And who've come and then there
[Guest]: is some like conniving, you know, lady of the, you know, owner of the kota who has either
[Guest]: kidnapped her or bought her or whatever, whatever. The fact is, they all belong to a close-knit
[Guest]: community and very close-knit families. And those families, and these are women who are
[Guest]: heading those families, and so carry a huge sense of duty and responsibility. Now, there
[Guest]: are a lot of it is not it. Most of it, I don't see it as transactional at all. It comes out
[Guest]: of, well, those are givens. It's like, very much like I'm the elder son of the family.
[Guest]: I've got to do this. So, I've got to do it. And so, you know, you say, well, why do you
[Guest]: have to do this? Why do you have to get your nephews into jobs, who will find jobs? Who
[Guest]: else will? I have to do it. And until they don't, they have to live with me. So, you
[Guest]: know, this, in fact, I see in Tawaif households, there's a lot of emphasis on that. These are
[Guest]: women who are, you know, taking care of very extended families, very, very extended families.
[Guest]: A lot of them, you know, active, fairly parasitical in nature, because this is one woman earning
[Guest]: or maximum two women earning, and everyone just kind of living. But that's the nature
[Guest]: of those families used to be. Now, of course, it's changed. But there's nothing there. Now,
[Guest]: whether it's delusional or, you know, it's pretty much the same as family, you know,
[Amit Varma]: as we see it in the other families. Fair enough. And a lot of your book does come
[Guest]: across as if it's just a story of another family. And there's so much intimacy. Because
[Guest]: we don't see them. The writing, actually, I think a lot of times, that point doesn't
[Guest]: come across. The book, of course, is located in the family. These are families. And also
[Guest]: the, you know, the ways in this family quarrels, family tensions, but also closeness and estrangements,
[Guest]: but then reproach, all of that, pretty much of what Indian families are all about. So,
[Guest]: except that here, it's not really the same, because here it's the women who are actually
[Guest]: the drivers. And in those ways, actually, certain dynamics change very much. But the
[Guest]: expectations and the responsibilities and duties, they are pretty much played out in
[Amit Varma]: a similar manner. True. Let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And after the commercial break, we'll come back and talk about one of the most fascinating
[Amit Varma]: characters in your book. That's Thurman Beebe and her story, which also I think, you know,
[Amit Varma]: her life seems to be set just as the sands are shifting. And, you know, so much is changing
[Amit Varma]: for the wives and indeed for India. So I found it quite fascinating. Let's take a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break. If you're listening to the scene in the unseen,
[Amit Varma]: it means you like listening to audio and you're thirsty for knowledge. That being the case,
[Amit Varma]: I'd urge you to check out Storytel, the sponsors of this episode. Storytel is an audiobook
[Amit Varma]: platform that has a massive range of audiobooks from around the world. The international collection
[Amit Varma]: is stellar, but so is a local collection. They have a fantastic range of Marathi and
[Amit Varma]: Hindi audiobooks. What's more, I do a weekly podcast there called The Book Club with Amit
[Amit Varma]: Verma, in which I talk about one book every week, giving context, giving you a taste of
[Amit Varma]: it and so on. Download that app and listen to my show. And as long as Storytel sponsors
[Amit Varma]: this show within this commercial itself, I will recommend an audiobook that I liked on
[Amit Varma]: that platform every week. My recommendation for this week is The Ivory Throne by Manu
[Amit Varma]: Pillay. This is a marvellous book about Kerala and its badass women and eye-opening in so
[Amit Varma]: many different ways. Manu had joined me on episode 156 of the scene in the unseen to
[Amit Varma]: speak about this book. And now you can listen to the book on Storytel, The Ivory Throne
[Amit Varma]: by Manu Pillay. Download the Storytel app or visit Storytel.com. Remember, there's Storytel
[Amit Varma]: with a single L. Storytel.com. Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with
[Amit Varma]: Sabha Dewan about a fantastic book, Tawaif Nama and indeed all her work on exploring
[Amit Varma]: the history of the Tawaif community. And you know, what I loved about your book also is
[Amit Varma]: that it's not a boring retelling of this happened in history that happened, but it's got all
[Amit Varma]: these wonderful vivid characters who come to life. And one of them, of course, is a
[Amit Varma]: character of Dharman Bibi. And Dharman Bibi is not just a young Tawaif, she's also a wrestler.
[Amit Varma]: So tell us a little bit about, you know, her early life and what her journey reveals about,
[Guest]: you know, those times. And I think, see, Dharman Bibi is an early 19th century Tawaif. And
[Guest]: so, now she is important because she represents just a certain glimpse of, you know, the kind
[Guest]: of the role that Tawaifs played or, you know, the kind of access that they had to power
[Guest]: and the way that they were being looked at just before 1857. You know, in fact, the whole
[Guest]: thing builds up to 1857, you know, the rebellion of 1857. And therefore, when this story came
[Guest]: to me and, you know, this family, they talked about their great, great, great grandmother,
[Guest]: as like completely, you know, taken in, because A, I had not come across a continuous family
[Guest]: history that went that long back. And B, she is just lovely, you know, and then there was
[Guest]: a mention of her even in the Gazetteer. I found it. So I said, wow, I mean, she's absolutely
[Guest]: lovely. But she is not the only, you know, the thing about being a wrestler, strange
[Guest]: as it may sound, it actually there were other Tawaifs of later vintage, who also, I'm not
[Guest]: too sure what the connection was. But I think maybe it's like physical regimen or exercise.
[Guest]: You're really fit, at least. Probably, because I've come across at least
[Guest]: two or three instances of, you know, women of Tawaifs, either being interested in wrestling.
[Guest]: Interested in wrestling, fine, you are and the patrons of wrestlers, which also you don't
[Guest]: kind of associate, but yes, like, but also being in doing wrestling, knowing wrestling,
[Guest]: knowing this Lathbazi. So, you know, these swordmanship, etc. It's very strange. That
[Guest]: kind of goes out then. By about late 19th century, one doesn't find these references
[Guest]: as much. But in Banaras, I have come across. In fact, if I'm not mistaken, even the great
[Guest]: Vidyadhari Bai, who is the great Thumri singer, I think, yes, she was very fond of, you know,
[Guest]: wrestling, or she could do wrestling herself. I'm not, I can't remember that. But I think
[Guest]: doing her, something about it. If you look at it, it's also about a certain mobility
[Guest]: and freedom of space of accessing. See, if you are wrestling, or you are, you know, doing
[Guest]: Lathbazi and all of that, and also horse riding, then there is an access to open spaces. You
[Guest]: know, there's a person who has enjoys that kind of freedom to access and freedom of movement.
[Amit Varma]: It is not exactly speaking of that, really. And one of the memorable scenes in your book,
[Amit Varma]: and it's interesting, I should call it scenes because you are, of course, a filmmaker. And
[Amit Varma]: this scene seemed so cinematic to me, like if ever a web series is made, this could really
[Amit Varma]: be a pivotal scene. And the pilot episode is that wrestling match, where you describe
[Amit Varma]: how this wrestler Dilip Singh is just beating all comers. And then at one point where he's
[Amit Varma]: beaten everyone, he's like, you know, does anyone care to challenge me? Does anyone have
[Amit Varma]: the courage? And this young 19 year old wife, which is of course, Dharmanbhai, has a self
[Amit Varma]: confidence to say that I will challenge you. And then she challenges him. And then that
[Amit Varma]: wrestling scene itself is so tinged with the erotic, that they are actually wrestling with
[Amit Varma]: each other. And it's a clash where eventually, none of them win. And then they eventually
[Amit Varma]: become lovers. And all of that was sort of incredibly fascinating. And one wonders that
[Amit Varma]: the people who are telling you the story, her great, great, great granddaughter, you
[Amit Varma]: know, in their imagining, how is all of this happening? Are they romanticizing it? Are
[Amit Varma]: they sort of building it up? Are you feeling in certain blanks yourself?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think what I was interested in, was in the ways in which the story was being told
[Guest]: to me. Because I think after all, these are stories that are coming down so many generations,
[Guest]: there surely must be additions in them, which I was open to. And my interest was not that
[Guest]: this has to be some authentic, that each part of the story has to be validated. Because
[Guest]: my interest in these stories was of the Tawaifs telling their own stories. I mean, see what
[Guest]: is important to them in the telling of the story about, say, Dharman Bibi.
[Guest]: And even anything they've added would actually be revelatory.
[Guest]: Absolutely. So that is why I was so interested in hearing from them, the stories about, you
[Guest]: know, these women in their families. Because that points towards the ways in what are the
[Guest]: things that they valorize? What are the things that are important? Where is the erotic? And
[Guest]: erotic, I realized pretty much, could also reside in a wrestling match. And in fact,
[Guest]: it was very erotic. You know, when I could see immense possibilities there. It's something
[Guest]: if I had been just presented, if I had to think of it, maybe for a moment, I'd be a
[Guest]: little bit flummoxed. But once I was told that story, definitely, yes, of course, an
[Guest]: extremely erotic moment, and charged moment. In fact, the image that came to mind is in
[Amit Varma]: the film Ghosts, Patrick Swayze and Demi Moore, and they're doing that sculpting bit. And
[Guest]: that's an erotic moment in the act of what is otherwise something totally unerotic. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I was also, you know, there's also this sort of fantastical element in your book in
[Amit Varma]: the stories, which are obviously coming through from what the stories that you're being told.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And you're reproducing them, for example, much later when Dharman BB, you know, she
[Amit Varma]: and her husband, Kuber Singh have rebelled, and they're on the run and all of that. And
[Amit Varma]: she's hiding in a temple and she's giving birth to twins. And every element of that
[Amit Varma]: little bit is obviously not true, but obviously also true in a certain way. For example, every
[Amit Varma]: time the English try to enter as a lightning strike, and she is protected, the Devi is
[Guest]: protecting her. That's how they read it. Yeah. And see, for me, I think that's the documentary
[Guest]: part of the filmmaker part of me. I realized pretty early as a filmmaker, documentary filmmaker,
[Guest]: that reality is very relative. You know, in terms of what is reality, it could be a slippery
[Guest]: creature. And your reality is not the same as mine. And for me, what is more important
[Guest]: is in terms of the ways in which a story is told. It's not the whether it happened or
[Guest]: it didn't happen. It's actually, ultimately, what is the story telling me? What is it pointing
[Guest]: me towards? So there is this kind of element of magical realism, which is there throughout
[Guest]: the book. Now, here is a community that, you know, is also very steeped in, by the way,
[Guest]: in Sufi worship, and then that cuts across Hindus and Muslims. And there is a ways in
[Guest]: which that they, I think that could be true of a lot of other Indians. It's of looking
[Guest]: at realities, where this kind of, you know, this junct between what we call the fantastical
[Guest]: and the real world necessarily does not exist. So what is, you know, the, there are ghosts
[Guest]: who enter your, you know, world, and they are also creatures. And they are also, there
[Guest]: are Sufi saints who are your benefactors. And they are people almost, I mean, they become
[Guest]: like characters in your story. And they are like these, your family elders also almost
[Guest]: taking care of you. So I pretty much realized that, I mean, this was an amazing treasure
[Guest]: trove of stories. And I didn't want to reduce, be reductionist and you know, because I think,
[Guest]: for me, the way they were told to me, I was interested in telling them as they were, without
[Guest]: passing judgment, because how can I claim that my reality is of a superior nature or
[Guest]: more real, I mean, or my idea of reality. There's no ways in which there's certain arrogance
[Guest]: that I could be speaking from that. No, I agree entirely. And for me, for instance,
[Guest]: that you know, the whole bit about when a Dharman baby is giving birth to the baby girls
[Guest]: in the sanctuary of Mundeshwari Devi's temple. Here's a Muslim Tawaif. This is a narrative
[Guest]: which flies in the face of colonial writing. And also later, even the, you know, the Hindu
[Guest]: nationalist writing. It shows you how natural our syncreticness is. So, and here are these
[Guest]: Muslim Tawaifs, three generations down or four generations down, telling me that story
[Guest]: about so it is their telling of the story that I'm going on. And where Mundeshwari naturally
[Guest]: becomes foster mother almost. She's Devi. She is the mother. She's mother goddess. She
[Guest]: has to be Dharman's mother. And she will have to protect Dharman and Dharman becomes her
[Guest]: daughter. And this Dharman, this great warrior, the wife warrior is now at her most vulnerable
[Guest]: because you know, she's giving birth and she's helpless and the enemy is outside. And so
[Guest]: of course, she's in the embrace of her mother, who then takes care of her and protects her.
[Guest]: When I heard of it, I actually had goosebumps, you know, because and then they attribute
[Guest]: and says, you see, Sadabahar, don't forget, she was one of the twins, the daughters, Dharman's
[Guest]: daughter. And Sadabahar, you know, has this mystical destiny. And she's also very fearless
[Guest]: in many ways. And they said that Sadabahar was after all born under Mundeshwari's gaze.
[Guest]: And it somehow becomes that, you know, that transmission of a certain energy that happened.
[Guest]: It's all very fascinating. And this also kind of ruptures this kind of ways in which you
[Guest]: patriarchy posits the illicit sexuality of the Tawaif and the Devi. You know, Aap ya
[Guest]: Devi hai, ya patita hai. But here actually the Tawaif is giving birth in the sanctuary
[Guest]: of the Devi and the Devi becomes the mother. So, of course, I love this story. And it said
[Guest]: so many things to me and provided me with an understanding with the ways in which they
[Guest]: construct syncreticism and lived syncretism. It's not like a spoken off or romanticized.
[Guest]: This is like very matter of fact, the way this story was told to me. And I just hope
[Guest]: that the readers also kind of give them that kind of peep.
[Amit Varma]: That's one of the things that made your book such a fun read is that you have allowed these
[Amit Varma]: stories to sort of, like you said, you just documented them. And it strikes me in a way
[Amit Varma]: that all histories are in some sense or the other mythologies. And, you know, the fact
[Amit Varma]: that a lot of this history is actually almost oral history is coming down through the generations.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, all these layers are getting added on and there were some beautifully filmy
[Amit Varma]: layers and all this. But, you know, in her life also, there are these sort of, you see
[Amit Varma]: society and the economy and politics changing as well. You know, for example, in the fact
[Amit Varma]: that as you pointed out, she was besotted with the Lipsynch, she wanted to be with him.
[Amit Varma]: But his economic circumstances led him to, you know, follow his brothers into the army
[Amit Varma]: and he's gone. And then she is being wooed by this man old enough to be her grandfather,
[Amit Varma]: Kuwar Singh. And at first, he's not willing. And then comes this very filmy element of
[Amit Varma]: her aunt Zahooran being wooed and poisoned by this Khan Azad Khan, sort of cut a long
[Amit Varma]: story short. And it's a delightful filmy story. Again, she dies and she gets into this marriage.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a wonderful, beautiful, loving marriage, which is, you know, it's not a marriage, it's
[Amit Varma]: a partnership. It's a partnership. She's a mistress, but it's almost like a marriage
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that she's the official sort of, I mean, there's another very nice story
[Amit Varma]: you tell about how this English official comes to Kuwar Singh's house and, you know, other
[Amit Varma]: Tawaifs are performing for him. And obviously, Dharman is at an elevated level being the
[Amit Varma]: mistress of this man, and she's not expected to perform. But then the Englishman says,
[Amit Varma]: no, I want to see her. And he can't piss off the Englishman because his economic fortunes
[Amit Varma]: are going down and he depends on the British. And she performs and he's getting to sort
[Amit Varma]: of carried away by this. And I'll quote from your book, Dharman seethed silently. This
[Amit Varma]: Virangi, foreigner, was behaving as if she, the leading Tawaif of Shahabad, was a humble
[Amit Varma]: Nachinia, a low placed dancer, or worse, a poor prostitute selling sex to English soldiers.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote. And there is again a delightful story about how she keeps piling him with
[Amit Varma]: drinks and then sends one of her... Gets him so drunk and then... Yeah, sends a maidservant
[Amit Varma]: dressed in her clothes and the guy doesn't realize the difference, all of which is like
[Amit Varma]: incredibly filmy. So if Bollywood people are listening to this.
[Guest]: These stories come down, the book is also pegged into actual research. And, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, and archival research. And so, which is the part which took a lot of time, but
[Guest]: actually, to understand a community, how do you understand a community? Yes, the context,
[Guest]: I was providing and I was working hard on them in researching the political, social
[Guest]: changing context. You know, this is like the unfolding of India through this Tawaif family
[Guest]: over 200 years. The thing is that the history of music and musicians in India, especially,
[Guest]: there's not that much written material. It's very based on oral accounts, oral histories.
[Guest]: You have to actually depend on those. And you come across actually over and over again,
[Guest]: you come across very many stories. I make no claims that any of these stories, necessarily,
[Guest]: it's exactly how it happened. It may or it may not have happened that way. But it's the
[Guest]: family's understanding of their sense of self. They derive their sense of self from these
[Guest]: stories of their, well, grandmother, aunts, grandaunts. That is what is giving also like,
[Guest]: you know, getting channelized into their sense of self. And what is that construction? How
[Guest]: are they constructing these histories? That speaks to me a lot about how the community
[Guest]: constructs itself, what the community values. It gives me a peep into their ways of being.
[Guest]: So, you know, some of the stories, whether unbelievable or not, but some of them are
[Guest]: actually very delightful. And the ones which have the element of, great element of magical
[Guest]: realism. Later on, there's this story of this, you know, aunt of the protagonist who literally
[Guest]: loses her way. She has this destiny of being one of the greatest musicians. And it's a
[Guest]: cautionary tale, actually. And, you know, Tawaif narratives are bound with cautionary
[Guest]: tales. So she loses her way because of her own hubris. And then ultimately, because she
[Guest]: had for long served, you know, the raag and raagni as well. It's they who come to her
[Guest]: rescue literally. And she finds herself in a forest, and they rescue her. And they take
[Guest]: her away. I mean, it's an incredible story. So, and it speaks to me about the intensely
[Guest]: closed relationship that, you know, these musicians have with their music. That's actually
[Guest]: what it's speaking about. In a very personal relationship, which is defining so much of
[Guest]: their being that ultimately, where you're saying that if I'm in the danger of being
[Guest]: killed, it is my music which will come and save me. And music literally in the shape
[Guest]: of a man or woman personified. I just found that those stories fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And less listeners think that the book is just a magic realist exercise. It's not just
[Amit Varma]: a small part of it. I found a lot of the background research very meticulous. And I am kind of
[Amit Varma]: fairly familiar with that period. What I, you know, found very interesting and wasn't
[Amit Varma]: so clued into was one you've written, of course, about slavery, that it was so prevalent, and
[Amit Varma]: it's not something that happened in America in the mid 19th century and was abolished.
[Amit Varma]: It was very prevalent in India, where people would sell their children and people would
[Amit Varma]: even sell their wives and all of that. There'd be sales deeds. They'll be sales deeds.
[Amit Varma]: Shockingly enough. Yeah. So it is part of our recent history as well. And what our culture,
[Amit Varma]: our culture, as it were. And what also kind of struck me was how much of the wife families,
[Amit Varma]: how much of the community is sustained through adoption. Like Dharman BB's aunt was herself
[Amit Varma]: adopted, as you pointed out. And there's a lot of sort of, like you write, quote, adoption
[Amit Varma]: of girl children among childless Tawaifs was most common, but it was not considered unusual
[Amit Varma]: for Tawaifs with biological daughters of their own to adopt as well. More daughters in the
[Amit Varma]: family meant more earning members and prosperity for the quota. Stop quote, sort of pointing
[Guest]: to the economic incentives of all of this. No, but actually, as the book points out in
[Guest]: the later chapters, and that is from post 1857, you know, the rule shifted from East
[Guest]: India Company to the crown, the British crown directly. And so, you know, there's the IPC
[Guest]: and all of these, the law changed. And adoption by Tawaifs was declared illegal. So, you know,
[Guest]: those Tawaifs who had already adopted, well, then their foster daughters could not claim
[Guest]: property because it was not recognized by the state. And any adoption done thereafter
[Guest]: from 1860 onwards, was anyway deemed illegal and a criminal activity. So, and then there's
[Guest]: this entire thing about how this family, Sadabahar and her, you know, twin, and their foster
[Guest]: mothers lose their entire fortune in being taken to the courts over this whole issue.
[Guest]: But the thing is that adoption was fairly common. And there are hangovers of some of
[Guest]: those terms which still remain. So, you know, for instance, even to this day, I was rather
[Guest]: shocked when they use the term Malkin. Malkin is kind of slave owner, I mean, kind of conjures
[Guest]: up things. So, but it's obviously a hangover because Malkins, now they say it simply means,
[Guest]: you know, like the mother of an active, this is being now used in the context of bar dancers,
[Guest]: some of whom come from Tawaif families. But the process of adoption from the outside stopped.
[Guest]: And that is because by the criminalization of the entire tradition by the colonial state.
[Guest]: So, A, they were being, you know, this point of time, 1870s, 1880s, you have a plethora
[Guest]: of court cases, if one comes across in the archives. And where especially actually of,
[Guest]: you know, dancers and singer communities from West India and also from the Devdasi communities,
[Guest]: and also Tawaif, some Tawaifs, which is on litigation, which is on this very fact, that
[Guest]: oh, so and so is, you know, an adopted daughter, well, her claims upon property being contested,
[Guest]: because she's illegal. So, you know, that, so, de facto, then her claims are not recognized.
[Guest]: So, this process, there was an entire, there seems to have been a big churning, actually,
[Guest]: within the community. That's actually where my archival research came in handy, is looking
[Guest]: at that and piecing the things. Also, I think that somewhere around late 19th, early 20th
[Guest]: century, at least from within the Tawaif communities, adoption from the outside came to an end,
[Guest]: because there is no memory of adopting daughters from the outside. Yes, adopting your own nieces,
[Guest]: that kind of within the family, that continued. And that continued, because, well, you know,
[Guest]: they just felt that that needed no official sanction. One of the smart things that Tawaif
[Guest]: communities in the North did, which I don't know why it was not followed by the communities
[Guest]: of dancers and singers in the West and South, was that they actually had an embargo of not
[Guest]: accessing law courts. It's really very interesting. And because they kind of realized quite early
[Guest]: on that, look, we are the losers every time we drag some family matter or, you know, issue
[Guest]: into the courts, because there's just so much bias and hostility and prejudice against well,
[Guest]: so called prostitutes. So, who are not and certainly their customary lifestyle, their
[Guest]: norms, customs are not being recognized at all. So, there was a certain embargo, which
[Guest]: is really very interesting, that they imposed, you know, if you go to access, if any family
[Guest]: does do that, then they would be excommunicated. Now, whether that was imposed all across all
[Guest]: the communities in the North, I don't know. But it seems to have been imposed, at least
[Guest]: in a lot of places. And people have a memory of that. And in a sense, it's a fantastic
[Amit Varma]: as an example of fighting colonialism, you know, which would our nationalists today would
[Amit Varma]: perhaps not think of that as a typical example. But it's an act of civil disobedience. Yeah.
[Guest]: So they basically here it was a survival of protecting your own customs and norms. And
[Guest]: very typically, the answer I would get was, we don't meddle in your affairs, you don't
[Guest]: meddle in ours. So, we don't want to go to the courts, we'll settle our affairs ourselves,
[Guest]: because they realize they're very smart, that they were losers in colonial courts. And that,
[Guest]: you know, kind of discomfort of accessing law courts, kind of still continues. I mean,
[Guest]: it's not although now, of course, there are no tawaifs. So, you know, this, but, and things
[Guest]: have changed substantially. But you hear of fewer numbers of cases going to the courts,
[Guest]: the emphasis still is of resolving it within the community somehow.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, one of the most striking factoids, which provided an impetus to the already moralistic
[Amit Varma]: stance of the British, the most striking factoid was that more soldiers died in the 1857 mutiny
[Amit Varma]: from venereal disease than in combat. And this completely blew my mind more European
[Amit Varma]: soldiers died in 1857 from venereal disease than in combat. And, you know, you already
[Amit Varma]: had existing offenses of adultery and enticement in the Indian Penal Code. To that it was added,
[Amit Varma]: you know, prostitutes and dancing girls, quote, unquote, as you've said, were forbidden from
[Amit Varma]: adopting children, since this was presumed to be for the purpose of inducting them into
[Amit Varma]: prostitution, your words, and you also say, quote, colonial lawmaking, thus contributed
[Amit Varma]: substantially to the dissolution of the autonomy and privileged position as independent women
[Amit Varma]: of substance that courtesans had customarily enjoyed, stop quote, and then you talk about
[Amit Varma]: how you know, state surveillance goes up and there are all these efforts.
[Guest]: That is one part of it. That is the criminal aspect of criminalizing the tradition. The
[Guest]: other aspect was in terms of even in terms of personal, you know, the so called, you
[Guest]: know, this, the lawmaking was divided into, you know, this criminal and personal. Yeah.
[Guest]: So and so here, what happened was that I mean, that had existed even pre 1857. But post 1857,
[Guest]: you had Muslim personal law, Hindu personal law. So communities were to be governed, you
[Guest]: know, their matters pertaining to inheritance, separation, property, all the civil matters
[Guest]: would be and that was to placate actually, you know, what was perceived to be the traditional,
[Guest]: more traditional elements within Indian society, who it was felt had got very offended by,
[Guest]: you know, colonial evangelical activity. And that was one of the reasons for 1857. Now,
[Guest]: so all civil matters came under these, you know, Hindu law, Muslim law, Christian law,
[Guest]: etc, etc. These were necessarily, you know, they are necessarily patriarchal in nature,
[Guest]: because where men are privileged in all of these, after all, over women, any of these
[Guest]: law things. So the customs, you know, whereas what the Tawaifs or any of the communities,
[Guest]: it's not just the Tawaifs, I mean, it's any of the communities, the other communities,
[Guest]: they had followed thus far customary law. Now, customary law a because they were all
[Guest]: these communities who are not of, you know, so called high caste, you know, many of them
[Guest]: did not have all of this written down. This came as part of a certain oral, you know,
[Guest]: tradition, and oral memory of law making that what happens is, and it does not fall neatly
[Guest]: into being Hindu or Muslim. So for instance, Nat Tawaifs, if they are Nat, Hindu Nat Tawaifs
[Guest]: and Muslim Nat Tawaifs, they all follow the same, you know, customs. And that is true
[Guest]: for all the other communities of Tawaifs also, in terms of inheritance, property, whatever,
[Guest]: whatever. Now, as far as the, and where, of course, women are being privileged, you know,
[Guest]: in the Tawaifs. Now, if they go to the, this was the greatest blow to the position and
[Guest]: autonomy of the Tawaifs, you know, and one of the reasons why they stopped accessing
[Guest]: law courts, because when they went to the law court, the first thing was that, you know,
[Guest]: if there was any case, you know, say a brother contesting against his sister, the brother
[Guest]: automatically stood much greater chance of winning the case, because that is how actually,
[Guest]: whether it is, you know, Muslim personal law or Hindu personal law, it is patriarchal,
[Guest]: it privileges men, any of these law makings. Secondly, their customary law was not recognized
[Guest]: because they said you are prostitutes, you are criminals. So to claim that you are, this
[Guest]: is custom is to say as if a band of thieves has a certain customs. So, you know, their
[Guest]: customs were disparaged. And then thirdly, there's a certain identity of being either
[Guest]: Hindu or Muslim imposed on them. It's fascinating. If you go through the legal archives, where
[Guest]: actually there are these contests made saying, you know, but your honour, my client is neither
[Guest]: Hindu nor Muslim, but identifies herself as what, what, what, and this is no how can that
[Guest]: be? It's very clear. Her name is this, her mother's name was this, they follow the custom
[Guest]: of burial. And so they have to be, you know, Muslim. So that there's a certain imposition
[Guest]: is also a certain ways in which there's a congealing of identities that takes place
[Guest]: in late 19th century. It's all a parcel of ways in which identities is this disparate
[Guest]: Hindu, Muslim, they get shaped also in this period. But actually, it's also it's a greatly
[Guest]: contributed to the erosion of the status of the wives. So it is not just the criminalization,
[Guest]: which is, you know, in terms of state surveillance, in terms of, you know, like, for instance,
[Guest]: the ways in which the contagious disease acts, where you were had to go and get yourself
[Guest]: compulsorily, I mean, you examined, etc, etc. All that was there anyway. It was at least
[Guest]: civil law, which was really, really eroded their position, which is why actually, they
[Guest]: said goodbye, they had a good sense to say goodbye to the law courts, as far as these
[Guest]: cases were concerned, they resolved it within themselves.
[Amit Varma]: No, it also strikes me about how it is such a blow to the beautiful diversity of our country
[Amit Varma]: by, you know, using the coercive power of the state to force them into these categories.
[Amit Varma]: And even any kind of passive resistance that they do, like, you know, boycotting the courts
[Amit Varma]: will eventually fail, because we are talking about them in the past tense. We you know,
[Amit Varma]: we and like this, I'm sure we've destroyed so many other
[Guest]: No, also, these are communities which were always much more marginal, you know, yeah.
[Guest]: I mean, they were dependent upon their survival on patronage. The fact is that their patrons
[Guest]: themselves were, you know, in many ways, negotiating, I mean, either they were buying their piece,
[Guest]: and that was fine with the colonial state, but many of them were not able to buy that
[Guest]: piece also. And these are communities that are anyway, much more marginal, much more
[Guest]: vulnerable to all the pulls and pushes. And it's not just the Tawafs, you have communities
[Guest]: across board, who were being pushed around in this ways and being forced to then start,
[Guest]: you know, self identifying themselves in certain ways, which, which, you know, and I think
[Guest]: that had a very profound impact in terms of the reshaping of Indian society, very, very
[Guest]: profound ways. And I think that really needs more study and more work.
[Amit Varma]: And you've of course, written very beautifully in your book about how through the second
[Amit Varma]: half of the 19th century, they are more and more already being marginal, they're more
[Amit Varma]: and more marginalized, and so on. And interestingly, they have that brief moment in the mainstream,
[Amit Varma]: when the gramophone comes in. And it's almost they who make the gramophone mainstream instead
[Amit Varma]: of the other way around. Tell me a bit about that phase and how that played out.
[Guest]: Well, you know, the coming of the gramophone, I mean, that's there in the book, it's actually
[Guest]: all well documented, you know, this, there was a big market with the coming of the actual
[Guest]: gramophone and the recording machines. There's this whole like, big fascination for the recorded
[Guest]: voice. So one part, of course, was to record your own voice, your loved ones, etc, etc.
[Guest]: But there was much greater demand for music, indigenous music. That's how it's very fascinating
[Guest]: that early 20th century, you have these all these companies from Europe and America, you
[Guest]: know, just racing and coming to India, who's going to beat, be the first one to reach here,
[Guest]: because this was recognized as a huge market, the huge potential. Now, what is really interesting
[Guest]: is that, okay, they come in. And the people, the only class of musicians who really show
[Guest]: an interest in recording for them, are the Tawaifs and the Devdasis. And very few of
[Guest]: the male musicians, especially, you know, the Khayal singers and Drupad Diyas and all,
[Guest]: you have much fewer numbers. Why is that? Well, many reasons. See, why the men didn't
[Guest]: want it is, you know, the obvious reason is a, the purest amongst them felt that it compromised
[Guest]: the integrity of their music. Because something, you know, Khayal can be sung over so many
[Guest]: hours, it has to be like, you have to explore leisurely each nuance of the raag and then
[Guest]: you hear this was even less than, you know, three minutes, you have to get it over with.
[Guest]: So obviously, there was, the purest felt offended, it was seen as something terribly crass and
[Guest]: crude. Commercialization, yeah, I mean, so that was
[Guest]: happening and a certain vulgarity. So that was one part of it. But well, I mean, all,
[Guest]: you know, all the, this is very, all very high minded. But actually, there were also
[Guest]: other reasons for it, which were less high minded, which was a, you know, the value of
[Guest]: music of some of the effect was based on the fact of its exclusive worth, so that it was
[Guest]: being performed for a small audience in these exclusive gatherings of, you know, in the
[Guest]: courts and in princely mayfields. And so, they felt that that their value, the value
[Guest]: of the music would go, if it was accessible to all on the gramophone, and could be easily
[Guest]: copied by everyone. So then what is their exclusive value of their music or their style?
[Guest]: And style could be copied by everyone then. There was a genuine real fear of plagiarism.
[Guest]: So which dates back then till at that time. And, and the third was actually, you know,
[Guest]: and you hear that is in terms of, you know, the horn, the gramophone horn, which there
[Guest]: was a fear that this actually, I mean, it's actually speaks of many things, if you think
[Guest]: about it, there was this thing, fear that this sucks the soul of the very singer of
[Guest]: the singer. People have similar fears about cameras and their photos being taken. Yeah.
[Guest]: So and well, I mean, you know, if you were to look deeper into that, it's this, you know,
[Guest]: in terms of looking at the market and music and what it meant, etc, etc, then that can
[Guest]: one can go into that. So the male musicians had those fears, real fears. And therefore
[Guest]: very few of them till at least almost 1920s. Very few of them much fewer numbers except
[Guest]: for certain notable, you know, examples like Ustad Abdul Kareem Khan Sahib, he sang, but
[Guest]: otherwise you have very few people. The wives who came in, you know, large numbers, they
[Guest]: were the main people who recorded for the gramophone, the wives and the devdasis. See,
[Guest]: they were being hounded out of the kothas. There was an entire, you know, this period
[Guest]: coincided with this whole anti-notch movement where, you know, there was this entire public
[Guest]: campaign against organizing notches, as they were called, natch, you know, the wives' performances
[Guest]: in elite homes, you know, for weddings or other celebrations. So there's an entire hounding
[Guest]: that was going on in various ways in the press, in railways, where, you know, the patrons
[Guest]: would be stopped physically from holding these notches, etc. So they were under pressure
[Guest]: to reinvent themselves. And the gramophone came along and was almost perfect for many
[Guest]: of them to actually reinvent themselves as gramophone singers. And to, you know, to make
[Amit Varma]: an image, have an image makeover. So on the one hand, you already have that artistic training
[Amit Varma]: in your, you know, great performers. And on the other hand, if you ain't got nothing,
[Guest]: you got nothing to lose. So you just kind of go with it. And so I think also with tawaifs,
[Guest]: if you read their biographies, then you realize that these are women who are always at the
[Guest]: forefront of exploring, you know, these long frontiers. Yeah. So I mean, also, you know,
[Guest]: that great travelers, I mean, forget about being great at every level. I mean, you know,
[Guest]: they were always willing that if there's an opportunity, which they could, there was a
[Guest]: possibility of some opportunity to pick up everything and to strike new roots at a completely
[Guest]: new place. It speaks of a certain way of being. I mean, and that's, of course, you know, a
[Guest]: community living by their wits, also of survivors. And so they're constantly moving. I think
[Guest]: moving physically from one place to another, but also then that also translates in being
[Guest]: able to move from one kind of a performance space to another kind of a performance space.
[Guest]: You know, being open to new opportunities in life. I think so it was not just the gramophone,
[Guest]: they were theater, then there were films. So in fact, in terms of the ways in which
[Guest]: we see now, I mean, the cinema and theater and the recording industry, recording music,
[Guest]: it was so much to tawaifs.
[Amit Varma]: And would you say the community really died out? Or would you say it just got absorbed
[Amit Varma]: into the mainstream just as the arts got absorbed into the mainstream in the sense that now
[Amit Varma]: there is no taboo against, you know, people will send their daughters to learn Bharatnatyam
[Amit Varma]: and Kathak and there's no taboo. In fact, there's even an aspirational sort of attraction
[Amit Varma]: for the arts and, you know, all of that.
[Guest]: So the community died out, not just because it did, unfortunately, it would have been,
[Guest]: I think, you know, there are ways in which, sad as it may be, but ways in which certain,
[Guest]: you know, art forms, etc, have been wiped out, you know, in terms of, well, them not
[Guest]: being as popular or the television, you know, hegemonic kind of entertainments, market driven
[Guest]: entertainments taking over.
[Amit Varma]: Where everything is dumbed down and all that, yeah.
[Guest]: But this is not, I don't think that is the case here. I mean, that just played one part
[Guest]: of it. The major part of it was the stigmatizing and sustained stigmatizing and shaming of
[Guest]: this community, where they were literally hounded and pushed out of the kothas.
[Amit Varma]: To the extent that you pointed out that many former Tawaifs won't even call themselves
[Guest]: dad, they'll say they're Gaikas or they're Singhas or whatever.
[Guest]: There's no hope in hell that you will find one former Tawaif who will acknowledge, you
[Guest]: know, call herself a Tawaif to a stranger. There's no way, because Tawaif now anyway
[Guest]: is synonymous with being a sex worker. We may argue, and rightly so, that why should
[Guest]: a sex worker be looked down upon? But that is how society does, you know, look upon them.
[Guest]: And it's also, it's actually a certain systematic vilification that they have suffered, you
[Guest]: know, over the decades, till actually, say in Banaras, you know, that hounding, physical
[Guest]: hounding went on till they were forced to shut kothas, finally, by the early 1980s.
[Guest]: And that just didn't happen because, oh, people's taste changed. That too happened. See, a lot
[Guest]: of things happened together. For instance, one thing that happened was that, you know,
[Guest]: the emphasis on companion marriages. So, you know, with the emphasis on women's education,
[Guest]: women coming out of parda, getting educated, the emphasis on marriages where your husband
[Guest]: and wife share, are friends, share ideas. That's a completely new concept for India
[Guest]: in many ways. So, if the emphasis on that kind of a relationship, then really, I mean,
[Guest]: the need for a mistress who is educated, if your wife is educated, you know, those, that
[Guest]: itself, kind of was, you know, that need lessens. Even that need for companionship, apart from
[Guest]: sex. Of a cultivated, you know, companion. I mean, if that kind of, you know, was being
[Guest]: undercut and cut away. But in terms of the cinema itself, the coming up of cinema and
[Guest]: film music, that I think went and before that, the gramophone, recorded music. The thing
[Guest]: about, because otherwise, kothas were also a site, was not just a sexual site. Exactly.
[Guest]: It was a site for going to listen to music. But if there was recorded music by the same
[Guest]: voices available, then, you know, kotha was not the only place you could access music.
[Amit Varma]: And not just that, that also struck me that, you know, when you mentioned kotha shutting
[Amit Varma]: down earlier, it struck me that many of us may attach the same stigma to kothas as in
[Amit Varma]: note or rebrothels, as we do to tawaifs. But as your book brings out, they were both kala
[Amit Varma]: academies of a sort. They were places where people interested in the arts and the culture
[Amit Varma]: would gather. An early form of the literary festival, in fact, where, you know, you speak
[Amit Varma]: of kothas, where you have these platforms and you have places for people to say it.
[Guest]: And this is where all of art is sort of centered. All these discussions, you know, literary
[Guest]: discussions with the tawaif playing hostess. So you have all these poets and they're, you
[Guest]: know, they're reciting. And so kotha was actually a literary site for a whole lot of literary
[Guest]: cultural activity. Exactly. We can note it now in a singular way as just being a site
[Guest]: for sexual activity. That was not necessarily so.
[Amit Varma]: So we've spoken for almost two hours about your book and I'd recommend all my listeners
[Amit Varma]: read it because it is both entertaining and moving and enlightening. I think it carries
[Amit Varma]: so many insights about our society, which, you know, we tend to take so much for granted.
[Amit Varma]: I'd like to now sort of turn to your working processes, you know, both across filmmaking
[Amit Varma]: and writing and to writing itself. And one of those here is that, you know, you're working.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, these are people you're spending a lot of time with. They are your friends. They
[Amit Varma]: are close to you. There is an intimacy there. You know, you point out about how, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you got fever and your friend looked after you and all of that. But at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: they are fulfilling a utilitarian role for you. You know, they are the means to the end
[Amit Varma]: of your book, so to say. How do you sort of, you know, reconcile those things? Is that
[Amit Varma]: something that sort of bothered you while writing the film or while writing the books?
[Guest]: I don't think they would. I would call it utilitarian because the ways in which relationships
[Guest]: flower and these are relationships that have flowered over a period of 20 years. You see,
[Guest]: I started work on The Other Song way back, nearly 20 years, in 2001. And I finished the
[Guest]: film along with the other two films, which is part of the trilogy. The trilogy got over
[Guest]: in 2009. And then I started working on the book, which was a continuation, you know,
[Guest]: with the same people and just the research, going deeper into the research. Both as a
[Guest]: filmmaker, actually, I identify myself primarily as a filmmaker. You know, I mean, even now
[Guest]: when people ask me as a filmmaker, the writer bit is very new to me. And well, as a writer
[Guest]: now, my relationship with all the people that I've worked with, if one has a utilitarian
[Guest]: approach to, you know, people, there's only that far you go with people. If one is using
[Guest]: them as a means to an end, then that remains just that. Then the kind of rich relationship
[Guest]: between people as human beings, then you don't see them, you stop seeing them as human beings,
[Guest]: because they just become a means to an end to you want your film done. So they are that.
[Guest]: And in so many ways, then you're stripping them of their humanity. That's a real problem.
[Guest]: So no, I do not see my relationships with everyone I work with are not, you know,
[Amit Varma]: What I was sort of asking is that they're both personal, obviously, and genuine, but
[Guest]: at the same time, there is an element that
[Guest]: Well, we are working, we are researching, I am looking at their lives. And it's not
[Guest]: that I will share an equally close relationship with everyone I work with. That is true. I
[Guest]: don't. And I think that also depends from people to people, circumstances, etc. I think
[Guest]: for me, that's not just for the wives that I've worked with. It's equally true for all
[Guest]: the other people I've worked with all the other films I've made.
[Guest]: I mean, it's a cliched question that's asked of nonfiction in general, actually had, you
[Guest]: know, these are relationships that I forge, not necessarily don't have to be become my
[Guest]: bosom buddies. But the relationships that I forge, and I take care, and I think that
[Guest]: is reflected then in the films is one in terms of mutual respect. And that is why I mean,
[Guest]: people always tell me, what takes so long in your film, you know, my films take so long
[Guest]: in making, not all, but some of them have taken immensely long. And because, for me,
[Guest]: the process is very important. You go wrong in the process, then you don't have a film.
[Guest]: And the process is not just glibly saying, Oh, what does mutual respect mean? Mutual
[Guest]: respect really means actually a of respecting the other person respecting the boundaries
[Guest]: that they are setting out for themselves, respecting those and not trying to be clever
[Guest]: and hoping the boss one day or the other, I'm going to skip them because people are
[Guest]: not stupid. If they have some boundaries, learn to respect them the way you have boundaries
[Guest]: and you want them to be respected. And yes, over a period of time, if you know, there's
[Guest]: a relationship that intensifies and you know, you they allow you in good for you, if not
[Guest]: too bad. It's also means of opening up yourself, you know, because that is a relationship and
[Guest]: that is a real problem. The unequal power dynamics, especially in filmmaking, where
[Guest]: I'm right up here, I'm looking at my subject, I expect them like with a microscope, I expect
[Guest]: them to open up their lives. But what about me? You know, and I don't work like that.
[Guest]: There is a certain giving and taking in terms of like sharing my life of sharing the way
[Guest]: I am as a person. And that is building up of certain relationships, not necessarily
[Guest]: of like friendship, but in terms of just also as colleagues, but relationships which have
[Guest]: to be based on a certain equality. And I guess also based on honesty, because you're very
[Guest]: upfront about what you're there for and how much they give is up to them. Absolutely.
[Guest]: And so for instance, I mean, there is a certain process that is involved. And it's true from
[Guest]: the film I've made, is that, especially with, you know, the trilogy I made, because it was
[Guest]: very sensitive. Here were women who were really sharing parts of their lives with me, which
[Guest]: I felt very privileged that they trusted me enough to do that. But then there was a certain
[Guest]: process we followed. We cut the film and then the rough cut had to be passed by them before
[Guest]: and anything. If they said, no, this, you know, people say something and then they change
[Guest]: their mind and say, no, I'm not comfortable. I said that, but I don't want that to come
[Guest]: in. You've got to respect that. Because I genuinely believe in, you know, in all humility
[Guest]: that a film or a book is not more important than a human being or a human life. So, you
[Guest]: know, you can do this, no great film at the expense of someone's, well, peace of mind
[Guest]: or whatever, you know, their existence. That's how I work. And that makes for a very slow
[Guest]: moving process. But I think at the end of the day, at least I sleep easier. You know,
[Guest]: the relationships I've shared thus far with everyone I've worked with, it's like I feel
[Guest]: yeah, fine. Some people have become lifelong friends. I mean, like the protagonist of the
[Guest]: book and her family. I mean, that family is now family to me and she's a very close friend
[Guest]: and comes and stays with me and all of that. There are some others who might not be my
[Guest]: close buddies. But yes, we stay in touch. There is, you know, festivals, etc. You wish
[Guest]: each other or whatever. So just I think it's also I just feel that in some ways I'm very
[Amit Varma]: lucky and which is my life. Very wise words. Let's kind of move on to the other thing that
[Amit Varma]: was very interesting to me is that, you know, you made all these films, as you said, you're
[Amit Varma]: mainly a filmmaker, and then you wrote this book, how different was constructing the book
[Amit Varma]: as opposed to the film? Like, what were your sort of writing practices? How would you discipline
[Amit Varma]: yourself? What did you learn about the process when you got into it?
[Guest]: You know, in some ways, some of the basics are not that different. Because filmmaking,
[Guest]: except in spurts, when you're working with a crew when you're shooting, or when you are
[Guest]: finally putting it together with an editor, it's essentially a very lonely exercise. You
[Guest]: are on your own. And not lonely, but on your own, rather. So in that sense, working on
[Guest]: the book, didn't feel that very different. I mean, the research process was the same.
[Guest]: I didn't do anything different. I followed the same processes, just that it became much
[Guest]: more intense. The process of like my archival research, obviously had to be much more thorough,
[Guest]: intense and long drawn out, wider than I'd done for a film. I don't need to do that much
[Guest]: for a film which is at the maximum 120 minutes long, which has many other elements too.
[Guest]: I think my greatest challenge as a while writing, and certainly in the first part, first phase,
[Guest]: first few years, I'd say, A was to find my voice. I mean, as a filmmaker, over the years,
[Guest]: you know, in some way, you fall, you get up, whatever, by just doing and you learn, you
[Guest]: get a sense of what is working, what is not working, you get a grammar, you learn and
[Guest]: as a film student, there's some basic grammar of the medium that one learned. Here I had
[Guest]: to learn the grammar myself, or well, hope that I'm getting it right.
[Amit Varma]: And also improvise a bit because it seems to me a very unconventional grammar for a
[Amit Varma]: typical Western novel, or typical Western book rather, because it's actually a second
[Amit Varma]: person voice, but contained within that is it very shifts to third person because you
[Amit Varma]: sort of take over the narrative of that second person who's telling you.
[Guest]: That was difficult to begin with, because that was the other part. That was the other
[Guest]: challenge. So one was, of course, like, is this reading well? Is this reading at all?
[Guest]: Because as a filmmaker, when I see something, I say, okay, this shot is not working. And
[Guest]: I know why this is not working. And I could have a sense of what could work, I might have
[Guest]: not done it. But at least I have a sense, something else will. As a first time writer,
[Guest]: that was a challenge. You know, I constantly like, like scared.
[Amit Varma]: And this seemed to me to be a very bold choice is going with the second person account, second
[Amit Varma]: person voice. And then, you know, though it's mostly third person, because it's that person's
[Guest]: voice speaking.
[Guest]: Well, this came out of the other challenge. And that challenge was, how do you write the
[Guest]: story of people who are living, who are very much there, who do not wish to have their
[Guest]: identities revealed, but whose story you wish to tell honestly, because it's very important
[Guest]: to share those stories. It's really important. But how do you protect them, their identity
[Guest]: in the process? That, I think, was my toughest challenge. Because it's much easier to write
[Guest]: about people who are dead and gone, you know. But these are living families. And I have
[Guest]: a sense of responsibility, duty towards them. You can't just, like, put them out, you know,
[Guest]: to... So, okay, okay, I changed their names. But that was the simpler part. Changing names,
[Guest]: then I tried, but that wasn't good enough. Because I was fearful, maybe not everyone,
[Guest]: but at least some people who knew the, or knew of them, could still be able to figure
[Guest]: out, this is so-and-so. Because there were certain things I wasn't changing. The Bhabhua
[Guest]: was not changed, this town that they come from, originally come from, and Banaras. So
[Guest]: I was very fearful that then people could perhaps...
[Amit Varma]: Put the pieces together.
[Guest]: Right, put the pieces. And I didn't want that. So then became this challenge that, okay,
[Guest]: the thing is that my stories have to be authentic. And they have to be as they were told to,
[Guest]: you know, they have to be narrated as they were told to me. But they don't necessarily
[Guest]: have to be exactly of the same person. So once I decided that, you know, so yes, there
[Guest]: is this family. There is a family, definitely. But you don't know their name. Only I know
[Guest]: them. As long as I'm true to the family, in terms of the ways in which the family functions,
[Guest]: the family dynamics, the family broader history, then I started making composite characters
[Guest]: also. So there's some character that say, for instance, I would, you know, fit in from
[Guest]: somewhere, put them in. That started, that was also a very intensely creative process.
[Guest]: But also, then it was also diffused chances of easy identification. You know, people say,
[Guest]: okay, but this is not like that in his family. And that's all done very deliberately. You
[Guest]: know, some characters have been introduced. Because how does it matter to a reader that
[Guest]: this family is actually there? Because you're not actually getting to know that the real
[Guest]: family with that's the whole point of it you have, they have to be protected. They don't
[Amit Varma]: want to be known.
[Amit Varma]: How have they reacted to the book?
[Guest]: They were very happy. There's the protagonist, she, she loved the cover. And she told me,
[Guest]: she said, this is just like me. Well, you know, you're the artist, Oraljit Sen made
[Guest]: the cover. And it's really a very beautiful cover. Very, very beautiful.
[Guest]: So this is this is just like, you, you know, he's done such a good likeness of me. Well,
[Guest]: he hadn't he had just this is his imagination. So yeah, but for obvious reasons, they don't
[Guest]: want to keep the copy in their house. And that's a understandable and very, very sad.
[Guest]: So it's very proud. And you know, she, and I know that there are times when she's very
[Guest]: tempted to say, that's me. And I've told her, I said, you know, anytime you feel like saying
[Guest]: so, it's your story, you say it. But then that's her call to make.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough. So my, you know, my final question before I release you from the torment of this
[Amit Varma]: non-airconditioned studio, is that, you know, the book is done. It might seem that it's
[Amit Varma]: just a book of history, that the Tawaifs are a community, which is no more. But it seems
[Amit Varma]: to me that especially in current times, it carries a lot of resonance, because this imposition
[Amit Varma]: of morality, this imposition of a certain kind of narrative where some things are right
[Amit Varma]: and some things aren't and where everything has to fit in. Some people belong, some don't.
[Amit Varma]: Some people belong, some don't. And everything has to fit into these neat categories. Seems
[Amit Varma]: to me now as oppressive for all of us, as you know, what happened to the Tawaifs was
[Amit Varma]: oppressive for them. You know, so when you look at these current times, and you're also
[Amit Varma]: someone who's a social activist yourself, you're active in all of this.
[Guest]: That's a new role. I feel very strange when people say social activist.
[Amit Varma]: Well, I mean, you started off the Not In My Name sort of...
[Guest]: I think this dispensation has forced many of us to...
[Amit Varma]: By default.
[Guest]: By default, just forced us. Activism, I never thought, you know, that that is something
[Guest]: I would be doing. But then they leave you with not much choice.
[Amit Varma]: So I mean, I don't even know what my question is. It's kind of a lament. I'm like one of
[Amit Varma]: those old men at those Q&As, who's, you know, not asking a question, but giving a comment.
[Amit Varma]: But your book spoke to me also because of that reason. Because I think that what happened
[Amit Varma]: to the Tawaifs, in a sense, is happening to all citizens who care about, you know, our
[Amit Varma]: diversity and, you know, our sense of what India is. And is that something that also
[Amit Varma]: kind of strikes you as, you know, someone who's made these films and written this book?
[Guest]: Oh, it was very clear to me, while I was writing the book, because the latter part of the book,
[Guest]: especially, was written and a lot of things changed in that period, in the life of my
[Guest]: protagonist and so it's documented. And, and, and especially in the past five or six years,
[Guest]: it was very obvious, you know, what was, you know, I could see it. I mean, I could see
[Guest]: it, of course, at the level of, you know, what was happening around at a macro level
[Guest]: and reacting, etc. But here I was dealing with a family and with my friend, who, you
[Guest]: know, she's always, always been shamed, and, you know, victimized for identity. So fine,
[Guest]: she was victimized for being a Tawaif. She left that far behind. It's leading, I want
[Guest]: to reveal the book, but yeah, it's leading a certain life, which is very different. Book
[Guest]: actually talks about it. It's, you know, very respectable life. How does she leave behind
[Guest]: being Muslim? And now she's, she has to deal with being a Muslim in the India of today.
[Guest]: And well, and also a single woman, you know, woman headed household with grandchildren,
[Guest]: young grandchildren, it's a very vulnerable position to be in, especially in UP, to be
[Guest]: in UP and in Banaras, to be a Muslim in Banaras. Although Banaras actually has a very sizable
[Guest]: Muslim population, which is a very well kept secret. But it would strike me. And, you know,
[Guest]: while I was writing the book, it really would come home to me because it was also the ongoing
[Guest]: conversations. It was becoming more and more about her sense of identity as a Muslim then.
[Guest]: And also this just completely, I mean, here is someone who I don't know of anyone, really
[Guest]: I don't know of anyone who in her lived life and her practice, intensely a spiritual person,
[Guest]: you know, there's a lot about Apa that I kind of go along with, but it's not that I fully
[Guest]: understand because I'm not, I don't necessarily share that. But an intensely Catholic, you
[Guest]: know, very Catholic in her belief systems completely. I mean, you know, the secularism,
[Guest]: of course, means that you keep religion away from other aspects of life. But in the Indian
[Guest]: context, secularism actually means when all religions are given that equal importance.
[Guest]: She is the great one practitioner I know of that Indian version of secularism, you know,
[Guest]: just genuinely, there's no bias, no prejudice, never. And I mean, come on, the person she
[Guest]: had her longest relationship with, like her husband, her long standing love, was a Hindu.
[Guest]: Her children had a Hindu come out of that union. So, I remember when, you know, in 2016-17,
[Guest]: when the mob lynchings were at their peak, she's really perplexed. She just couldn't
[Guest]: make sense of it. And she said, how can they do this? How do I explain to her, you know,
[Guest]: this? And the point is that it's not happened overnight. The point is that there are, I
[Guest]: think it's been, we might tend to now conveniently say, oh, 2014 was this, like, that's when
[Guest]: things went bad. But I think the fact is, there's been a slide and there's for a very
[Guest]: long time.
[Guest]: I'd done an episode with Akshay Mukul on his book, The Gita Press, and this has been a
[Guest]: strain in our society for decades.
[Guest]: The Tawaf Nama, actually, people have commented. And I was conscious of it. I mean, it's not
[Guest]: that I did it consciously. It's as much also a book about Hindu nationalism. And the fact
[Guest]: that that dark underside of nationalism, which is Hindu nationalism, has always been present.
[Guest]: It's just that, you know, it could, at certain ways, points, be balanced out. But it was
[Guest]: always there.
[Guest]: And almost as an extension of British colonialism.
[Guest]: And then there's been a slide in, you know, I mean, especially from the 1980s onwards
[Guest]: with the whole thing of opening up of Ram Mandir, you know, Ayodhya and all of that.
[Guest]: I think that kind of, but it's not as if before that, it didn't exist. It was there. It was
[Guest]: that darkness was there. You know, the so called non communal parties, they opened the
[Guest]: doors for this, for them to come in and we are paying, all of us are paying the price
[Guest]: for it today.
[Guest]: And today, of course, I mean, the very existence, when she says she's panicked, she's paranoid,
[Guest]: you know, this whole thing about not accessing courts and all. Now it doesn't hold because
[Guest]: she is paranoid. She says, you know, about, she's been running around collecting every
[Guest]: shred of paper about, you know, proving your identity.
[Guest]: What do I say? You know, you boycott it. It's someone, she's one of the most vulnerable
[Guest]: people.
[Amit Varma]: And people like that can't afford to say hum kaagaz nahi dikhayenge, we can't afford to
[Guest]: say that.
[Guest]: The only way I believe in hum kaagaz nahi dikhayenge, but that has to be at a community
[Guest]: level then. It cannot be at an individual level, because, you know, they just, the people
[Guest]: are just so, so vulnerable. You can't push them into, you know, this and can't hold here
[Guest]: in front of that.
[Guest]: So I mean, if there has to be a, you know, this civil disobedience, well, then it has
[Guest]: to be across localities or communities, whichever way it works best.
[Guest]: So yeah, I mean, I have, strangely, you know, this book came out, and then from since last
[Guest]: year and been busy with the thing of promoting it and going through the thing.
[Guest]: And it's been fun, but it's also the danger that we are all in, and which is looming in
[Guest]: a way, because we, well, we are inured by many things, you know, class and all of that.
[Guest]: But the danger that India is in at the moment, I think that anyone, anyone with a modicum
[Amit Varma]: of brains would see just, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, that's what your very fine book is also about.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for coming on the show, Saba.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or offline.
[Amit Varma]: And please buy Tawaif Namaah by Saba Dewan, we, you know, barely scratched the surface
[Amit Varma]: of what the book is about, and I guarantee you'll enjoy it.
[Amit Varma]: Saba very smartly is not on social media, that's how she gets work done.
[Amit Varma]: But you can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in and thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.